What does sterling's fall mean for you and your investments?
Our experts weigh in on sterling's weakness.
This article isn’t personal advice. If you’re not sure whether an investment is right for you please
    seek advice. If you choose to invest the value of your investment will rise and fall, so you could get
    back less than you put in.
Probably the most immediate effect of the turmoil currently raging at the heart of British politics is the fall in sterling.
On the day of the 2016 referendum the pound was over $1.48, since then it’s lost nearly 19% of its value. This week it’s moved below $1.20, its lowest since October 2016. However that drop was caused by a ‘flash crash’, the last time the pound was regularly trading at this level you’d have to look as far back as the mid-80s.
Currency movements of that scale create winners and losers, among both companies and individuals. With more volatility likely over the coming days, weeks and months, getting to grips with what these movements mean has rarely been more important.
For investors in overseas shares – either direct or through funds – a falling pound is arguably good news. The pounds and pence value of these investments has been boosted in sterling terms. A similar effect is also boosting lots of UK listed businesses.
If you look at the largest businesses on the London Stock Exchange, companies like Shell and HSBC, most make a significant chunk of profits outside the UK.
Global profits are worth more in sterling terms following the fall in the pound. These huge, global companies have a much bigger effect on the wider index than their smaller higher-risk counterparts, and as a result the UK stock market as a whole has risen as sterling has fallen.
Look a little deeper though and all is not quite so rosy.
Companies that generate sales and profits inside the UK haven’t benefited from the pound’s slide. On the face of it that shouldn’t be a problem, but many domestic companies import goods from abroad, and the cost of those inputs has risen as sterling’s slipped.
Retailers, for example, have reported increases in the cost of stock. That’s forced management teams to make the unpleasant choice between raising prices (and risk losing customers) or taking the hit on margins (and sacrifice profits). Neither is particularly pleasant. And it’s a similar story in industries as diverse as casual dining and housebuilding.
The question investors need to be asking themselves is what to do from here?
It’s tempting to look at the recent past and focus on international companies and those stocks with international profits. But currencies are fickle beasts. Alan Greenspan, the former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve (the US central bank) once said that “forecasting exchange rates has a success rate no better than that of forecasting the outcome of a coin toss”.
Should Brexit resolve itself painlessly the pound could bounce strongly. That would wipe out the gains from currency movements that more internationally exposed business have enjoyed.
At the same time it would ease the pressure on domestic companies. It might feel uncomfortable at the moment, but we think this is a strong argument in favour of a well-diversified portfolio that includes at least some exposure to UK domestics.
If you’re going to be sending money abroad or receiving payments from overseas in the future, changes in exchange rate matter.
As with companies, whether sterling’s fall is good news or bad will depend on the direction of the transaction. But regardless of whether you welcome or worry about currency fluctuations, our currency service can help.
You can lock in an exchange rate today for up to two years ahead with a forward contract. No matter what happens between now and when you need to transfer your money, you’ll know exactly what it’ll cost.
By fixing the rate, you’ll benefit if the exchange rate gets worse, but you won’t benefit if it gets better. The purpose of a forward contract is really to give you peace of mind, regardless of what happens.
If you’re waiting for exchange rates to improve, a rate alert or market order could help.
When you set a rate alert we’ll track the markets for you and contact you if your rate becomes available.
A market order could give you more certainty. It goes one step further and automatically buys your currency if the rate you want becomes available, even if happens in the middle of the night.
Of course these services could also help if you’re looking to convert back to sterling and you think the pound could fall further. Rate alerts and market orders are useful and can save you money if markets move in the way you expect, but they don’t offer any shelter if exchange rates move the other way.
Find out more online or call our currency specialists on 0117 311 3257.
The Hargreaves Lansdown Currency Service is a trading name of Hargreaves Lansdown Asset Management Limited, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Hargreaves Lansdown Plc, One College Square South, Anchor Road, Bristol, BS1 5HL. Company Registered in England & Wales No. 1896481. It is authorised by the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) as a Payment Institution under the Payment Services Regulations 2017. The Firm Reference number is 115248.
This article isn’t personal advice. If you’re not sure whether an investment is right for you please seek
  advice. If you choose to invest the value of your investment will rise and fall, so you could get back
  less than you put in.
