When you subscribe we will use the information you provide to send you these newsletters. Sometimes they’ll include recommendations for other related newsletters or services we offer. Our Privacy Notice explains more about how we use your data, and your rights. You can unsubscribe at any time.
Edinburgh fintech Zumo has added a function to its digital wallet that will allows users to trade directly from cryptocurrency into British pounds and spend it via a debit card.
The company says the move will allow people to buy and sell cryptocurrency and conventional currencies through their digital wallet, which it described as "a seamless fiat-to-cryptocurrency payments system".
That will mean users can effectively spend cryptocurrency using the convertible debit card which Zumo aims to launch in September.
The pound sterling functionality in Zumo's platform is powered by Modulr and will be available from mid-July. Zumo already allows users to manage Bitcoin and Ether using private keys which only they can access, and plans to add a stablecoin - a digital currency backed by a basket of fiat currencies - to its platform in the next few weeks.
Zumo says the service will become faster and cheaper as it gathers data on users' asset portfolios and more seamless as it facilitates more crypto and fiat currencies such as US dollars and Euros.
Zumo’s founder Nick Jones said: “We are delighted to partner with an exciting brand like Modulr, which shares our vision to solve the problems of access in traditional banking. Zumo is on a mission to radically improve the security, cost and speed of payments globally, and the addition of GBP alongside cryptocurrencies takes us one step closer.”
In May, Zumo completed a funding round backed by Coldplay bassist Guy Berryman and Murray Capital’s David Murray.
London-based Modulr's Payments as a Service software is designed as a faster, more efficient alternative to mainstream banking. The firm, which has an office in Edinburgh, has processed £30 billion in payments so far for partners including Revolut, Sage, and Liberis, and in March announced it had joined global payments network Visa, as a principal issuing member.
Myles Stephenson, chief executive and Founder at Modulr, said: “We are delighted to power the innovation that Zumo is bringing to the market and UK economy. We are proud to provide the underlying GBP payments infrastructure upon which Zumo build and enhances its services, as it shakes up the digital asset market and presents its customers with an experience fit for the Instant Economy.”
Zumo will host a virtual event 'the Money Revolution' with Wayra and Modulr on Thursday 2 July to discuss the role of cryptocurrency in global financial systems.
