8@eight: ASX set for negative start to week; $A rises
The Australian sharemarket is poised to start the week in negative territory, on the back of a negative lead from global markets, though Wall Street was closed on Friday. Shortly before 7am AEST, futures are pointing to a drop of 35 points, or 0.6 per cent, at the open.
1. A quiet end to a positive week in global markets: As expected, it was a quiet end to the trading week for financial markets on Friday, with US markets offline for the Independence Day holiday. Overall, price action pointed to a general aversion to risk taking, amidst a dearth of economic and corporate news, as well as what was day of much lower than average activity.
Futures are pointing to a negative start for the ASX.
It capped of what was overall a bullish week for global markets. Economic data proved a catalyst for risk assets, as on balance, key economies across the globe re-open, despite the clear increase in COVID-19 cases across the world.
2. Friday’s trade sees risk-assets take pause: European stocks dropped across the board, while S&P500 Futures declined by around 0.5 per cent. Bond yields fells, especially in Europe, after reported disputes between EU policymakers cast further confusion over the dynamics of the ECB’s asset purchasing program.
Oil prices decline -0.8 per cent in sympathy with stocks, and gold prices pulled back again from multi-year highs. FX markets traded a little more mixed. The US Dollar Index dipped very slightly, though it climbed against the Euro. The AUD/USD and other growth currencies topped the G10 currency map.
3. Global stocks record solid week’s trade: A soft session on Friday for stocks belied what was an otherwise strong week for global equities. The MSCI world index advanced, to close at a three week high.
The S&P500 gained 1.5 per cent over the course of the week, while the NASDAQ climbed 1.90 per cent to record new record highs. European and Asian stocks outperformed their US counterparts. The DAX rallied 3.63 per cent for the week, while the CSI300 added a noteworthy 6.78 per cent. The Nikkei and FTSE100 were the only major benchmark indices not to record gains for the weekly.
4. FX markets reflect the pro-risk sentiment: The pro-risk bent and general drop in measures of stock market volatility was mirrored in FX markets. The US Dollar declined for the week, for the first time in 3 weeks, with the Greenback sitting at the bottom of the G10 currency map by Friday’s close. Improving market sentiment and a solid week of data pushed growth-sensitive currencies higher.
While the pound also broadly climbed, in part as the UK economy begins its re-opening, and as Brexit-headlines hint at possible progress in negotiations between the UK and EU.
5. Commodities climb on hopes for stronger growth: A weaker US Dollar broadly supported commodity prices. Gold proved a small beneficiary of that dynamic, trading at fresh 8-year highs during the week, as falling real yields continue to bolster the appeal of the yellow metal.
Stronger global economic data aided a material 4-and-a-half per cent rally in oil prices. And industrial metals prices also generally furthered their short-term uptrend, to trade at levels not recorded since the beginning of March.
6. ASX200 to open new week on backfoot: Friday’s tepid lead is setting up the ASX200 for a soft start this morning, with SPI Futures indicating a -0.6 per cent drop for the index at the open. It comes off the back of a positive day’s trade on Friday, and an overall positive week for Australian equities.
The ASX200 climbed 2.60 per cent for the 5-days up until Friday, to push the index close to a 1-month high. All sectors finished the trading week in the green, with IT stocks topping the market, followed by communications services and consumer sector stocks.
7. A relatively low-impact data week: Event risk is relatively thin across global markets in the week ahead. High-impact economic data is somewhat lacking. US earnings season will begin to warm-up, however few of the heavy-hitting companies will report this week.
Locally, the RBA’s monthly meeting will garner attention, though no change of policy is expected from the central bank. The most important data may come from the daily COVID-19 infection updates in the US, as market participants vigilantly follow the risk of another major virus outbreak across the states.
This column was produced in commercial partnership between The Sydney Morning Herald, The Age and IG
Information is of a general nature only.
