ADP reported an increase of 2.369 million private-sector jobs in June, below expectations while another S&P 500 rally , after staging the best quarter since 1998, seems unreasonable, according to FXStreet’s analyst Yohay Elam.
“ADP, America's largest payroll provider, reported an increase of 2.369 million private-sector positions in the US in June. Expectations were closer to three million, so the actual number missed expectations. ADP also revised its figures for April, moving from a loss of 2.76 million to an increase of 3.065 million – an astonishing change of six million.”
“The bigger question is – will the US labor market continue its upward trajectory and complete a full recovery in the upcoming months? The answer is unfortunately negative. Employers do not hire so many workers in two months – these are furloughed or laid-off workers who have returned to their positions. The rapid bounce may be close to an end – with fewer 'long-hanging fruits' left.”
“The S&P 500 Index enjoyed a robust recovery in the second quarter – the best since 1998. The gains have been fueled by the Federal Reserve's $3 trillion increase in its balance sheet and also some hope for a recovery. That may already be in the price after that impressive Q2 – and could have already reached unsustainable levels. Will stocks fall now? That may have to wait for the official Nonfarm Payrolls, or perhaps later on when data from the latter half of June comes out.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
