This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
AMD Was the Top Stock in the S&P 500 Last Year. It Looks Like a Buy Again, Analyst Says.
Advanced Micro Devices shares are getting a boost Friday from Northland Securities analyst Gus Richard, who lifted his rating on the chip maker’s shares to Outperform from Market Perform, with a new target price of $52.50, up from $45.
The upgrade follows a 34% slide in AMD’s stock (ticker: AMD) from Feb. 19 through Thursday’s close. AMD was the best-performing stock in the S&P 500 last year, gaining 148%.
“While it is difficult to know what the ultimate impact of the Coronavirus will be, we think at this junction people are at least aware of the problem,” he writes in a research note. Richard argues that a shift in consumer behavior may benefit game console sales in the second half of the year, and notes that there is “solid demand in the data center market.” At the current price, he concludes, the stock is “compelling” in a time frame of 12 months or longer.
Exclusive data, tables and charts from Barron's Market Lab.
Richard writes that “AMD has become a quality semiconductor franchise.” He notes that AMD expects to grow at a 20% annualized rate over the next four years, driven by both strong products and technology leadership.
“AMD is a node and half ahead of Intel [INTC] which in of itself drives product leadership,” he writes, referring to the company’s edge on Intel in producing chips with smaller line widths. “In addition, AMD has made wise technology selections in process and packaging technology. Its choices have driven lower manufacturing cost and higher performance relative to Intel. Its leadership is demonstrated by its selection by two U.S. national labs supercomputer programs.”
Richard reduced his 2020 estimates, pushing some revenue into 2021 to reflect coronavirus-related issues. For 2020, he now sees revenue of $8.5 billion, down from $8.65 billion previously. But for 2021, he ups his estimate to $10.5 billion from $10 billion. Street consensus is $8.8 billion for this year, and $10.5 billion for next year.
AMD stock is up 4.5%, at $40.78, in recent trading. The S&P 500 is up 2.2%.
AMD Was the Top Stock in the S&P 500 Last Year. It Looks Like a Buy Again, Analyst Says.
Advanced Micro Devices shares are getting a boost Friday from Northland Securities analyst Gus Richard, who lifted his rating on the chip maker’s shares to Outperform from Market Perform, with a new target price of $52.
