was delisted from the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DIJA) due to a shrinking stock price.
The top five U.S. stocks have notoriously strong cash positions which has helped them navigate uncertainty. But not all financial problems stem from reduced sales. Regulatory changes and high-profile investigations into some of the world’s biggest companies continue to pose a threat.
The Wall Street Journal reports the Justice Department is moving forward with an antitrust lawsuit against Alphabet, the parent company of Google, as early as this summer. In March, Amazon was hit with a class action antitrust lawsuit alleging price fixing.
The stock market doesn’t always react as you’d expect to legal troubles, though. When details of the Facebook and Cambridge Analytica scandal were released, the stock would go on to sink 16% from previous highs. Yet when CEO Mark Zuckerberg testified in front of Congress , shares rose nearly 5%.
What all this could mean for these companies is unclear. But many investors may not realize how big price swings in a small handful of stocks could impact their account—even if they’re not buying single stocks.
Deliberate diversification is still the best way to help insulate your investment portfolio against the major losses that can coincide with concentration risk. As the market capitalization of the S&P 500 grows on a global scale , this becomes more challenging.
When deciding on your investment strategy, consider diversifying your asset allocation between and within asset classes . For example, holding stocks and bonds will give you exposure to two different asset classes. But if you just buy a fund that tracks the S&P 500 and some 10-year treasuries, your investment mix is still limited to large-cap U.S. stocks and intermediate term government bonds.
Other factors to consider when diversifying are geography, market capitalization (e.g. small-cap or mid-cap), international developed or emerging economies, across sectors and industries, corporate and government bonds, and so on.
As the big guys get bigger, you’ll also want to consider the intersect between your ETF and mutual fund holdings. For example, if you own a tech stock ETF, a S&P 500 index fund, and a total stock market fund, the top holdings are most likely going to be the same across all three. This undermines the intent of diversifying.
Holding big tech names certainly paid off over the last few years. What returns look like going forward is impossible to predict. But as a larger share of the performance of the major indices are driven by the top five names, you should at least understand your exposure.
I'm a Certified Financial Planner professional and believer that complex doesn’t mean better and shortcuts rarely work. Our financial lives are multi-dimensional, so I
I'm a Certified Financial Planner professional and believer that complex doesn’t mean better and shortcuts rarely work. Our financial lives are multi-dimensional, so I write about a range of topics in personal finance and investing. I’ve been published by TheStreet, U.S. News and World Report, Business Insider, and others. In working with clients, I aim to help put the pieces together into a unified strategy. My goal is to help educate investors about the best ways to build wealth and avoid letting ‘sexy’ strategies drive financial decisions. Saving and investing, like diet and exercise, takes time (and sometimes sacrifice) to see lasting results. Darrow Wealth Management is an independent, fee-only registered investment advisor and second-generation family business in Boston and Concord, MA. The material contained in my articles is for general information only and should not be construed as the rendering of personalized investment, legal, accounting or tax advice.
