Some of this rise of the last 3 years is justified by the roughly 20% growth seen in Morgan Stanley’s revenues over 2016 to 2019, which translated into a 55% increase in Net Income. The higher growth in net income was mainly due to the drop in total expenses (compensation cost, occupancy & equipment expense, professional services cost, etc.) as a % of revenues over the same period.
Morgan Stanley’s PE multiple changed from 13x in 2016 to 9.5x in 2019. While the company’s PE is down to 8.5x now, there is some upside potential when the current PE is compared to levels seen in the past years – PE of 9.5x at the end of 2019 and 13x in late 2016.
So what’s the likely trigger and timing for further upside?
Morgan Stanley has a big portfolio of wealth management loans which could lead to sizable losses if consumer activity levels fall and the economy heads towards a recession. Not to forget, it would make it expensive for the bank to secure funding, impacting its overall operations. On similar lines, the economic slowdown is likely to hurt its investment banking and asset management businesses, due to lower consumer activity levels and market volatility.
However, there is a silver lining, as the bank could profit from its significant presence in the sales & trading business. The company generated around 33% of its revenues from its sales & trading business in 2019. Given the extreme level of volatility in equity & debt markets over recent months, the bank is well-positioned to report strong results for its securities trading arm, which should partially mitigate the negative impact of weak economic conditions on its other operating segments.
That said, we expect continued improvement in demand and subdued growth in the number of new Covid-19 cases in the U.S. to buoy market expectations over the coming weeks. Following the Fed stimulus - which set a floor on fear - the market has been willing to “look through” the current weak period and take a longer-term view. With investors focusing their attention on 2021 results, the valuations vs. historic valuations become important in finding value (although market sentiment can be fickle, and evidence of an uptick in new cases could spook investors once again).
