Bitcoin proves that its correlation with the stock market is not a passing haze.
S&P 500 futures opened in the red on Monday dropping over 3%; Bitcoin slumps under $9,000.
Bitcoin led the cryptocurrency market in red turbulent waters on Monday. The king of cryptocurrency tanked under $9,000 for the first time in June. This move comes after a fairly stable weekend session. Bitcoin ousted stability as volatility increased amid a stronger bearish grip. Prices on leading derivatives trading platforms plummeted to lows around $8,920. Spot trading platforms also experienced a fall of the same magnitude. Currently, Bitcoin is down 2.2% on the day to trade at $9,118.
In just under 2 hours, about $20 million worth of long positions has been liquidated. This according to data provided by the analysis platform, Skew.com. In addition to that, in the last 24 hours, $10 million more in long positions had been liquidated.
As mentioned the losses are spread across the crypto landscape. For instance, Ethereum is trading 3.54% lower with a market value of $223. Ripple has also not been spared and is doddering 2.98% lower on the day to trade at $0.1845. The rest of the digital assets are nursing losses ranging from 1% to 6% on the day.
Bitcoin recently established a correlation with the stock market has also been witnessed with a fall stock market. Most futures of American equities opened the week’s trading in losses. The below S&P 500 futures (ESI) chart shows that Bitcoin traded in tandem with the equities towards the end of the trading on Sunday. Futures are down 3% on the day since opening which means Bitcoin has started to lead the recovery.
“Once equities correct strongly, odds that $BTC sees a correction too is large. Simple math, increased demand for cash may have its influence temporarily,” according to an analyst who predicted a V-shaped reversal from the devastating March crash.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
