(Photo by Bryan R. Smith / AFP) (Photo by BRYAN R. SMITH/AFP via Getty Images)
The Dow Jones futures are trading higher by 210 points as the DJIA index steadily continues to record more gains. However, traders should note that volume isn’t high, which usually means that the momentum may not last long. On the daily chart, the Dow Jones index has moved below its 200-day moving average. If it can’t keep above the 50-day moving average, the coronavirus stock market rally could be in serious trouble.
The DJIA index has also moved below its 50 and 100-week smooth moving averages on the weekly chart. This is another bearish signal indicating things are about to take a wrong turn.
The S&P 500 futures—which offer a better representation of the overall stock market—show that the bulls are still in control of the price because the S&P 500 index is above all the critical 50, 100, and 200-day SMA on a daily time frame.
DJIA chart. Dow Jones futures show weakness as the price has dropped below its 50 and 100-week ... [+] smooth moving average. The Dow could be in trouble and so the stock market rally
The US stock market rally reversed its gains on Friday and closed with mild losses. The speculative position net non-commercial future positions have increased their net short positions on the S&P 500 stocks. So, it looks like this group of speculators is expecting more pain for the stock market.
The Dow and NASDAQ stock chart. The Dow Jones and NASDAQ weekly gains. The DJIA index is losing bull ... [+] momentum. The NASDAQ index is still holding on to gains due to FANG stocks
The negative outlook fits as the Dow Jones posted minimal gains over the last week. The NASDAQ
index led the gains last week, followed by the S&P 500. The Dow Jones industrial average was the worst performer.
The S&P 500 stocks may decline. The S&P 500 index shows speculators have increased their short bets. ... [+] This could be due to the rise in coronavirus cases
The S&P500 index closed down by 0.56%, and the Dow Jones industrial average sank by 0.80% yesterday. Utility stocks pulled the S&P 500 index lower, and 10 out of 11 sectors showed losses. The S&P 500 is trading at a price-to-earnings ratio of 21.7 on a trailing basis, which makes the index somewhat expensive. The 30-day price volatility declined to 27.41 percent against the previous value of 27.65%, while the average for the past month is 25.43%
The tech index, NASDAQ closed above the 10,00 mark, but still recorded a tiny loss of 0.03%.
In Oklahoma, Trump called virus testing as a “double-edged sword” and urged the medical community to “slow the testing down.” White House trade adviser Peter Navarro told CNN that the statement was “ tongue in cheek .” Testing is the most critical step in fighting the pandemic, in my opinion, and slowing down this process is like inviting an enemy to live in your house. For traders, coronavirus has become the biggest foe of economic growth. Therefore to restart the economy, we need to hunt it down through testing and then kill it.
US coronavirus cases have continued to rise. In Florida, new coronavirus cases surged more than the national weekly average, and the situation looks even grimmer in Texas. According to John Hopkins university’s data, there are over 2.27 million infected in the country, and the number increased by 27, 476 last week. New York had 664 new cases, and New Jersey recorded a 0.2% increase in cases. There has been an increase in coronavirus cases in Germany and Brazil remains the hot spot. Beijing reported significantly lower levels of newly infected, and it appears that the situation may be under control.
John Bolton, President Trump’s longest-serving national security advisor, believes that four more years of Trump would be unhealthy for the United States. In his opinion, the upcoming US election could act as the last “guardrail” to save the country from a second term. US elections are approaching fast, and President Trump is determined to remain in office. Should Trump be re-elected, it’s pretty much a given that he will ramp up spending over the next few years to stimulate growth without examining the effect this may have on the national debt.
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have a wealth of knowledge from trading in the financial markets which spans over 10 years and specialize in forex, commodities and equities. I frequently partake across all major tier one media channels such as CNBC and Bloomberg discussing investment strategies around major macroeconomic and political events. I have often participated in panel discussions on notable events across the globe. More recently, during the Brexit referendum, I predicted the crash in sterling against the dollar to a level of 1.18 in an interview with MarketWatch. I also called the bottom in Crude oil when it was trading near $25 with numerous print and digital financial media outlets. I have also worked  with top UK universities to give lectures and delivered an investment and trading course at the London School of Economics.
