The Federal Reserve chairman, Jerome Powell, sent a clear message to the Senate and for the markets that any recovery for the economy is very much dependent on controlling coronavirus. The message was explicit that if we can control the spread of Covid-19, we can be on track sooner than the currently anticipated time period. But if the situation continues to get out of control, the recovery time frame is likely to stretch longer.
The S&P 500 futures, along with DJIA futures, are also firmly focused on the US ADP non-farm employment change. This data sets the tone for the US NFP, which is due tomorrow. The forecast for US ADP employment is for 2900K against the previous reading of -2760K. Clearly, the bar is set very high, and if the actual number is better, it will create a massive positive shift in market sentiment. In fact, this could be the catalyst that bulls have been waiting for to push the stock market into a new range, because so far, we are stuck in a consolidation range.
Gold prices are likely to reach the 1,800 mark very soon, a significant milestone. The door is wide for the prices to surpass the all-time high of 1927. Gold prices have recorded seven consecutive quarters of gains, and this is the biggest winning streak since the financial crisis. The exciting factor is that there is more to come because the Fed is likely to be locked in a low-interest-rate environment for an extended period of time.
Here is more on this:
The S&P 500 chart shows that the US stock market had the best quarter in over a decade, as I mentioned yesterday . All three major US indices have posted substantial quarterly gains, but the NASDAQ
index takes the lead in terms of percentage gain for the second quarter. S&P 500 and Dow Jones scores the best quarterly performance since 1998 as the chart shows below
The Dow Jones has also recorded the best quarterly performance since the financial crisis as the chart below confirms.
NASDAQ, Dow Jones and S&P 500 chart. US stock market post best quarter since 1998. Traders have not ... [+] paid much attention to coronavirus
Going forward, what is quite important is whether the current V-shape recovery in the US equity markets can really continue. Of course, the two most critical factors are likely to remain the same: coronavirus and US-China relationship.
Dow Index and S&P 500 Index: Market Breadth
The stock market’s breadth shows that bulls are gaining more grounds because 33% of the Dow Jones stocks are trading above the 200-day moving average. Yesterday, we had 27% of DJIA stocks trading above their 200-day moving average.
The S&P 500 index confirms that 39% of the stocks trading above their 200-day moving average; this is an improvement of 3%.
The Dow Jones futures are trading modestly higher by 1oo points , earlier they have spent most of the morning in negative territory.
The Dow Jones futures almost tested the 100-week moving average on a weekly time frame yesterday. We are still trading below the 50 and 100-week, which means that the bulls still need to clear these two obstacles before the DJIA rally can continue.
The S&P 500 index’s weekly chart shows more strength as the price is above all of the three critical moving averages: 50, 100, and 200-week smooth moving averages. S&P 500 stocks are likely to continue their journey to the upside, but it is crucial to keep in mind that we are still trading within last week’s range.
The S&P500 index jumped 1.54% yesterday. All of the 12 sectors closed in positive territory, and the information technology sector led the index's gains. The volume for the S&P 500 index was a little light, and this raises some alarm bells for the coronavirus stock market rally.
The Dow Jones index also scored 195 points and surged 0.85%. 26 out of 30 Dow Jones stocks closed with gains.
Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, once again raised alarm bells when he told the Senate that he is not pleased with the current situation. If the pandemic isn’t controlled, we could see up to 100,000 Covid-19 cases a day. In his Senate hearing, he didn’t show much confidence regarding the current coronavirus situation.
This does not support the risk-on sentiment, but of course, traders have not paid much attention to his warnings or pessimism as the evidence of this is buried in the second quarter’s stock market performance.
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have a wealth of knowledge from trading in the financial markets which spans over 10 years and specialize in forex, commodities and equities. I frequently partake across all major tier one media channels such as CNBC and Bloomberg discussing investment strategies around major macroeconomic and political events. I have often participated in panel discussions on notable events across the globe. More recently, during the Brexit referendum, I predicted the crash in sterling against the dollar to a level of 1.18 in an interview with MarketWatch. I also called the bottom in Crude oil when it was trading near $25 with numerous print and digital financial media outlets. I have also worked  with top UK universities to give lectures and delivered an investment and trading course at the London School of Economics.
