Read more: We spoke to 3 financial experts, who broke down why you should buy these 13 ETFs to maximize stock-market returns right now
The Dow's slump marked its worst day since April, reviving market volatility not seen since the initial upswing from coronavirus-induced lows.
"We were probably due for a 5% or 10% correction, but obviously I didn't expect that to happen in one day," Randy Frederick, vice president of trading and derivatives at the Schwab Center for Financial Research, told Business Insider.
He continued: "When you get a day like today, it's one of those times that tends to scare people who don't have a lot of experience in this. So the selling begets more selling, which begets more selling."
Though surging COVID cases raised fears of a prolonged recession, the White House stamped out the possibility of another nationwide lockdown . Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin told CNBC on Thursday "we can't shut down the economy again," adding "you're going to create more damage" with such an action.
Read more: Renowned strategist Tom Lee nailed the market's 40% surge from its worst-ever crash. Here are 17 clobbered stocks he recommends for superior returns as the recovery gains steam.
Weekly jobless-claims data released on Thursday backed up Powell's gloomy sentiment. Roughly 1.5 million Americans filed for unemployment insurance last week, the Labor Department said. The reading brought the 12-week total to 44 million. Continuing claims, or the number of Americans receiving unemployment benefits, slid slightly from the previous week, to 20.9 million.
Some of the day's biggest losers were those that gained the most on reopening hopes. Carnival Cruises , Royal Caribbean , and Norwegian Cruise Line all plunged. Airline stocks including Delta , American , and United slid sharply as well. Gap and Kohl's were among the biggest losers in the retail sector.
Early moves in the Cboe Volatility Index mirrored the stock market's sharp downturn. The VIX, known as the stock market "fear gauge," spiked as much as 54% Thursday, breaching the 40 threshold for the first time since late April.
Oil tanked through the session amid the wider risk-off attitude. West Texas Intermediate crude sank as much as 11%, to $35.41 per barrel. Brent crude , the international benchmark, slumped 9.4%, to $37.82, at intraday lows.
Carmen Reinicke contributed to this report.
Now read more markets coverage from Markets Insider and Business Insider:
