The downdrafts and rebounds the stock markets have endured the past two weeks have put investors nerves on edge and exposed the markets to further declines. Both of the Dow and S&P 500 Indexes sliced through their 50, 100 and 200-day moving averages in a matter of days.
The chart below shows four support levels that may help the markets. However, given the very uncertain outlook for company’s financials due to the coronavirus and algorithms creating a large amount of volatility, even support levels may not help much, if at all.
Jim Cramer on CNBC sometimes highlights a chart from the Fibonacci Queen, Carolyn Boroden. She uses the 5 and 13-day exponential moving averages to show upward and downward trends in the markets. When the 5-day is above the 13-day the markets are moving higher and tend to stay in that trend until the lines cross.
The same goes for the downside. When the 5-day is below the 13-day the markets tend to decline. Below is the S&P 500 over the past year with highlights for the previous three and current downdrafts.
There have two times during the past eight plus years that the S&P 500 has touched its 200-day moving average in its weekly chart and both times it rebounded sharply. As shown in the chart below the Index got a fair amount above all its moving averages in late 2019 and early 2020 and is now between its 50 and 100-day moving averages. The 200-day moving average support is 2,637 or 11% below its current value. If it falls this far it would be a drop of 22% from its all-time high.
Investors are very nervous as can be seen in the VIX or Volatility Index chart. What it is showing is that the markets will probably be subject to large swings to the upside and downside over at least the next few days and probably weeks.
One of the largest unknowns created by the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is how much and how long of an impact it will have on company’s revenues and earnings. With large numbers of them pulling their financial guidance and not providing an update, analysts will be behind on updating their estimates.
Traders work during the closing bell at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). Photo by JOHANNES ... [+] EISELE/AFP via Getty Images.
While analysts have been dropping their first quarter projections to show a very slight decline of 0.1% in earnings, they are expecting a rebound to 3.3%, 8.4% and 10.9% growth year-over-year in the second, third and fourth quarters, respectively, per FactSet .
The FactSet chart below has the current forecasts for the S&P 500’s 2020 and 2021 yearly EPS and I’ve added 2019’s since at least one sell-side analyst is expecting 2020 to now be flat compared to 2019.
S&P 500 earnings for 2019, 2020 and 2021
With the current 2020 EPS projection, the S&P 500 is trading at a 17x PE multiple. If earnings show no growth for the year the multiple moves up to 18x, still below the 19x it reached a few weeks ago but still on the expensive side. Very low interest rates could support valuations above the longer-term averages, but if earnings forecasts continue to decline the market may not care.
I provide independent research of technology companies and was previously one of two analysts that determined the technology holdings for Atlantic Trust (Invesco's high net worth group), a firm with $15 billion under management. Before joining Atlantic Trust I was the Internet Security Software analyst for Smith Barney (where I authored the most comprehensive industry report “Internet Security Software: The Ultimate Internet Infrastructure”) and an Enterprise Server Hardware analyst at Salomon Brothers. Prior to becoming an equity analyst, I spent 16 years at IBM in a variety of sales and manufacturing positions. I have a B.S. in Industrial Engineering from Stanford University and a Postgraduate Diploma in Economics from the University of Sussex, England.
