Focus:  Crude oil sustains recovery attempt, Apple reclaims key resistance, Charting pockets of relative sector ‘strength’
Editor’s Note: This is a free edition of The Technical Indicator, a daily MarketWatch subscriber newsletter. To get this column each market day, click here.
Technically speaking, the major U.S. benchmarks have extended a respectable rally attempt, rising in the wake of extensive damage.
Against this backdrop, the S&P 500 has knifed within view of its next notable resistance (2,742) from a bullish island reversal to start the second quarter.
hourly chart highlights the past two weeks.
As illustrated, the S&P has reversed sharply from major support (2,478), reaching three-week highs.
On further strength, the S&P’s 20% pullback mark (2,709) is followed by an inflection point at 2,742.
Similarly, the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
has cleared its range top.
Here again, the upturn punctuates a bullish island reversal defined by the recent gaps.
Delving deeper, notable support matches the April low (20,735).  The Dow’s recovery attempt is intact barring a violation.
has knifed to three-week highs.
From current levels, recall that the 20% pullback mark (7,854) closely matches its 38% retracement of the 2020 downdraft (7,856).  This area pivots to support.
Widening the view to six months adds perspective.
On this wider view, the Nasdaq has reclaimed three key levels:
The 7,855 resistance, detailed on the hourly chart.
This area broadly pivots to support.
Looking elsewhere, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has also extended its recovery attempt.
The prevailing upturn originates from the April low (20,735), an area that pivots to key support.
Conversely, three overhead inflection points stand out:
The Dow’s 200-week moving average, currently 23,686.
The pending test of this area — potentially over the next several sessions — will likely add color.
Meanwhile, the S&P 500 has knifed from major support, an area broadly spanning from 2,447 to 2,478.
Amid the upturn, the S&P has reclaimed its 20-day moving average, currently 2,518, for the first time since Feb. 21.  As always, the 20-day is a widely-tracked near-term trending indicator under normal market conditions.
As detailed above, the major U.S. benchmarks have extended a respectable bear-market rally attempt.
Each index has spiked at least 19% from the March low amid still receding market volatility.  The CBOE Volatility Index has registered a week-to-date low around 43.50.
Still, consider that the VIX’ 2018 peak (50.30) remains not too distant from current levels.
So even as volatility fades — which is positive — it remains near levels formerly signaling extreme uncertainty, not far from 11-year highs.
Collectively, a near-term recovery attempt remains underway — a bear-market rally attempt — amid a still bearish intermediate- to longer-term technical backdrop.
Moving to the small-caps, the iShares Russell 2000 ETF has reversed as much as 17.7% off the March low.
Similarly, the SPDR S&P MidCap 400 ETF is digesting the massive March plunge.  Its consolidation phase has registered amid decreased relative volume.
Meanwhile, the SPDR Trust S&P 500 has extended a rally from three-year lows.
The prevailing upturn places it atop the 20-day moving average, currently 251.20, for the first time since February.
Moving to market breadth, consider that Monday’s massive rally — a 7.0% single-day spike on the S&P 500 — was fueled by internal strength that pressed bullish extremes.
On a headline basis, NYSE advancing volume surpassed declining volume by an 8-to-1 margin.
The upturn builds on the initially massive March 24 rally, the Dow industrials’ biggest daily gain since the 1930’s.  Recall that single-day spike was fueled by 15-to-1 positive breadth.
So the March 24 rally marked a potential stake-in-the-ground cornerstone session from which a viable recovery attempt can build.  (See the March 25 review. )
As always, in a textbook world, two 9-to-1 up days, across about a seven-session window, reliably signals a major trend shift.  (For instance, the early-2019 rally originated from two 9-to-1 up days across a precisely seven-session window.)
Against the current backdrop, the S&P 500’s recovery attempt has encompassed a 15-to-1 up day, and an 8-to-1 up day, across 10 sessions.  (One aggressive down day has also registered, last week’s 12-to-1 down day to start the second quarter.)
So the prevailing recovery attempt has been punctuated by internals that would register as firmly-bullish amid normal market conditions.
Nonetheless, the preceding market downdraft was fueled off-the-charts bearish internals, at one point encompassing eight 8-to-1 down days (or worse) across a 15-session span.
All told, the recovery attempt shows promising internal traits, normally sufficient to establish the bottom.  The sticking point is that the prevailing backdrop is not normal.
The rally’s sustainability in the wake of an historic market downdraft is an open question.
Recall two headline inflection points, detailed last week:
The upturn punctuates a jagged, but successful, test of major support (2,478), detailed previously. Last week’s close (2,488) registered slightly atop the inflection point.  (Also recall that last week’s closing low (2,470.5), to start the second quarter, registered slightly under support.)
On further strength, two overhead inflection points stand out:
The S&P 500’s 20% pullback mark (2,709) detailed on the four-year chart.
A retest of each area is underway early Tuesday, and will likely add color.   (A more distant inflection point matches the S&P’s 50% retracement of the 2020 downdraft (2,792).)
Beyond the prevailing recovery attempt, the S&P 500’s intermediate- to longer-term bias remains bearish pending repairs.
Also see: Charting the approach of major resistance, S&P 500 extends bear-market rally.
The charts below detail names that are technically well positioned. These are radar screen names — sectors or stocks poised to move in the near term. For the original comments on the stocks below, see The Technical Indicator Library.
Drilling down further, the United States Oil Fund has likely established an intermediate-term floor.   The fund tracks the price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) light, sweet crude oil.
Crude-oil prices notched a 25% single-day spike last week, rising amid optimism that key oil producing countries may agree to production cuts at a virtual meeting later this week.
The upturn marked the biggest daily crude-oil price spike on record.
Tactically, familiar resistance rests in the 5.63-to-5.67 area, and is followed by the April peak (6.02).
Conversely, a notable floor broadly spans from about 4.85 to 5.10.  The USO’s recovery attempt is intact barring a violation.
continues to act relatively well.
As illustrated, the shares have sustained the prevailing recovery attempt, maintaining a posture atop key support.  Three inflection points, initially detailed March 27, stand out:
Against this backdrop, the April low (236.90) has registered above support, preserving Apple’s recovery attempt.
More immediately, the shares have reclaimed the 200-day moving average, currently 251.70.  As always, the 200-day is a widely-tracked longer-term trending indicator.  A sustained posture higher incrementally strengthens the backdrop.
Moving to U.S. sectors, the VanEck Vectors Semiconductor ETF SMH,
continues to exhibit relative strength.  The group has spiked as much as 29.0% from the March low.
Against this backdrop, the group has rallied to challenge the former breakout point, circa 122.50, an area matching the mid-2019 range top.
Monday’s close (123.18) registered slightly atop resistance amid increased volume.  On further strength, the marquee 200-day moving average, currently 126.35, remains slightly more distant.
Broadly speaking, the areas detailed would initially be expected to draw selling pressure. The prevailing retest from underneath should be a useful bull-bear gauge.
Finally, the Consumer Staples Select Sector SPDR XLP,
is also acting relatively well.  (Yield = 3.0%.)
The group has spiked as much as 21.3% from the March low.
Technically, the group is pressing a three-week range top matching the post-breakdown peak (57.45).  The prevailing upturn has been fueled by decreased relative volume.
On further strength, firmer overhead spans from 59.40 to 59.80, levels matching the 50-day moving average and the breakdown point.  The group’s pending response to this area will likely add color.  As always, the chances of follow-through improve to the extent the group holds tightly to resistance.
Editor’s Note: This is a free edition of The Technical Indicator, a daily MarketWatch subscriber newsletter. To get this column each market day, click here.
The table below includes names recently profiled in The Technical Indicator that remain well positioned. For the original comments, see The Technical Indicator Library.
