Market Experts Say the Coronavirus Selloff Is ‘Worse Than Anything We’ve Seen Since 1929.’ Here’s How Bad It Could Get.
Updated March 21, 2020 11:19 am ET / Original March 20, 2020 4:29 pm ET
To many, if not most, investors, stocks’ brutal coronavirus-spurred selloff has defied fundamental analysis. After all, what good are traditional valuation metrics, such as price-to-earnings and price-to-sales ratios, when revenue and earnings estimates are thrown out the window as business activity comes to a halt?
If those who focus on fundamentals to determine an asset’s fair value are rightly befuddled, technical analysts, who aim to gauge the direction of prices by focusing on historical price trends, buying and selling volume, and other statistical indicators, think they might have an edge. Technicians believe that history tends to repeat, and that studying price charts, particularly in relation to past trends, can help identify turning points in the market, optimal entry and exit levels, and changes in leadership.
“In this environment, you can’t explain the magnitude of the moves you’re seeing via fundamental analysis, or even by looking at things from a macro perspective,” says Katie Stockton, founder and managing partner of Fairlead Strategies, a Connecticut-based research firm specializing in technical analysis. “But studying charts and prices can give you some guidance as to how oversold markets are, and whether further breakdowns are at hand.”
Robert Sluymer, technical strategist at FundStrat Global Advisors, puts it more succinctly: “At times like these, price is news,” he says. “It is often the only guide investors have during a panic.”
Barron’s recently checked in with Sluymer, Stockton, and Andy Addison, founder of the technical-analysis research service The Institutional View, to learn what their indicators say about the market’s future. There’s bad news—after falling more than 30%, to 2304, the S&P 500 could have further downside. But there’s good news, too, in the relative outperformance of sectors such as health care and stocks such as Walmart (ticker: WM), which could be well positioned once the carnage ends.
Addison says his technical work—which draws on the study of prices, moving averages, measures of buying and selling volume and momentum, and relative strength, or the performance of a security in relation to its benchmark—first generated sell signals in early January on oil and copper, and later, on small- and mid-cap stocks. On Jan. 26, it signaled a buy on the Cboe Volatility index, or VIX, which subsequently shot from around 15 to a high of 85.47. “I had no idea what would prompt the market’s decline,” he says. “But those sell signals warned me that something very negative was going to happen.”
Now we know what happened: The coronavirus, which first surfaced in China late last year, is sweeping through the U.S., and wreaking havoc on the health-care system, the economy, and the financial markets.
Addison describes the selloff in the S&P 500 as “worse than anything we’ve seen since 1929, and maybe worse than that in the way it began.” Specifically, the index fell through every price level at which it previously found buying support, including its 200-week moving average, without bouncing up. The washout took the S&P back to its December 2018 closing low of 2351.
Addison expects the S&P to try to stabilize around 2300; if it does, it could bounce up to 2650-2800, he says. But he warns that if it breaks below 2300 decisively, there is no meaningful support until 2000-2100. “Even then, the market might not hold there, given the dismal action in bank stocks,” he says. “I would not look for a meaningful bottom to occur until the number of stocks making new lows shrinks, and more stocks begin to trade above their moving averages at various time periods.”
With 10-year Treasury yields bottoming and the Treasury yield curve steepening, bank stocks should have gotten a lift, he says. Instead, monthly charts of the group’s benchmarks, such as the KBW Bank Index, have broken down from a nine-year trading range. “That tells me we’re going to see big loan losses, which makes sense, given the devastation we have seen across the economy,” he says.
Health care looks like a much better bet to Addison, who cites Amgen (AMGN), Eli Lilly (LLY), and Merck (MRK) as promising names, based on their relative strength. “One of the best ways to identify new leaders once the fire is extinguished is to look for groups or individual stocks that have been declining less than their benchmark indexes,” he says.
Relative strength is calculated by dividing a security’s price by that of its benchmark index. The more the ratio rises for a security, the better it is performing, relative to the index.
Addison cites Chinese e-commerce platform Pinduoduo (PDD) as another issue exhibiting relative strength; it has broken out of a two-year base and outpaced the S&P 500 by 16 percentage points since year end. “When the price either doesn’t return to the previous floor or holds there and bounces, that’s a signal the selling pressure has begun to lessen,” he explains.
Sluymer’s study of weekly momentum indicators, which track the rate of change of stock prices, led him to conclude late last year that the market would peak in mid- to late-February. “I thought we’d see a drop of 5% to 8% before bottoming in the middle of the second quarter,” he says.
He still thinks the S&P 500 could bottom in April or May, and is eyeing support around 2346, the last major intraday market-cycle low for the index, hit on Dec. 26, 2018. “The S&P 500 undercut that level Wednesday and bounced off it, a move that coincided with a 62% retracement from 2016’s low to 2020’s high,” he says, adding that markets often retrace 50% to 62% of their previous moves. “2346 is an important technical level that the market is challenging. If we see more backing and filling around it, we’ll get more encouragement that it is a trading low.”
Sluymer pays particular attention to the market’s 200-week moving average, currently around 2640.
During the secular bull markets of the 1950s, ’60s, ’80s, ’90s, and 2010s, market-cycle lows often developed around their 200-week MAs. He harks back to what he calls the optimistic parallel—the 1957-’62 market cycle—which also saw a near-30% decline in the S&P 500, or a 62% retracement of the prior bull market, and a drop below the index’s then-200-week MA. “We have to respect the market’s recent break below its 200-week moving average, but the precedent for a recovery is there if you look at 1962 and other cycles,” he says.
That said, other trends are ugly. Sluymer cites “significant technical damage” to charts of bank stocks, the energy sector, and emerging markets. Also, the MSCI EAFE index has broken an uptrend that had been in place since 1975.
But there are silver linings: Stocks such as Walmart and Kimberly-Clark [KMB] have done well, relative to the S&P 500, as has Roper Technologies [ROP], a maker of software and industrial products, along with some drug stocks. “It makes sense, especially for long-only institutional portfolios, to have some defensive names,” he says. “Unlike individuals, they don’t have the option of going to cash.”
Fairlead Strategies’ Stockton pays most attention to charts’ support and resistance levels, or potential areas of buying and selling pressure. “I’m looking for previous peaks and troughs where a security has found buyers and sellers before,” she says.
She uses price as a guide, and tools such as Fibonacci retracement levels, which point to support and resistance levels derived from a number sequence discovered by a 13th-century mathematician. She also likes the “cloud model,” whose formulas are based on the midpoint of high/low price spreads.
She’s looking for the 2305-2350 level to provide a footing for the S&P 500. “It would be a natural place for buyers to step in and add exposure into weakness, at least temporarily,” she comments. Stockton has a “neutral to lower” bias toward the index in the near term, but expects the current downdraft to give way to a buying opportunity in coming weeks. To gauge when, she’ll be consulting a variety of indicators, including the stochastic oscillator—a momentum gauge that compares a particular closing price to a range of prices over a defined period. Readings range from zero to 100%, with 20% indicating oversold conditions, and 80%, overbought. “The stochastics currently are below 20%, and at least several weeks from turning up” she says.
Stockton is far more bearish on oil, whose most recent breakdown occurred in January from a “triangle formation,” characterized in this case by lower highs and equal lows. “Breakdowns from that type of pattern tend to be fairly high-probability,” she says. West Texas Intermediate crude is pending confirmation of a breakdown below $26 a barrel; Friday, it was around $23. Assuming it falls further over a two-week period—her definition of confirmation—final support, in her view, lies around $17, near the 2001 low.
Stockton, too, considers health care a port in the storm. “We see signs of downside exhaustion in the XLV [ Health Care Select Sector SPDR ],” she says.
Market Experts Say the Coronavirus Selloff Is ‘Worse Than Anything We’ve Seen Since 1929.’ Here’s How Bad It Could Get.
To many, if not most, investors, stocks’ brutal coronavirus-spurred selloff has defied fundamental analysis.
