Nike stock has soared nearly 36% this year as of afternoon trading on Dec. 31.
With the year almost over, we’re taking a look at all 30 stocks in the Dow , starting with the worst performer— Walgreens Boots Alliance —and working our way up to the highest-flying stock in the benchmark— Apple . The ranking may shift before the close of 2019 trading, but the stories behind the stocks shouldn’t.
While the Dow Jones Industrial Average lagged behind the S&P 500 this year, neither index could keep up with Nike stock. The U.S. athletic-wear company soared 36% this year to $101.31 as of Dec. 31, dashing past closing price records along the way.
Nike (ticker: NKE) stock beat the market in 2018 too. Analysts were looking ahead to 19% upside in 2019, according to FactSet’s average price target heading into the new year. The company’s continued growth has come as retailers and brands alike balance innovations in online sales with keeping costs down.
The stock carried its momentum from a strong earnings report in December 2018 all the way to the mid-$80 range before its fiscal third-quarter report in late March 2019.
Nike fell into the $70s range when the broader market dipped in May. But as the market rallied ahead of the Federal Reserve’s summer rate cut , so did Nike stock. Not even an uncharacteristic fiscal fourth-quarter earnings miss could quiet the bulls. And they were right.
A solid earnings beat in September brought back Nike’s record for bottom-line beats, which put the stock solidly over the $90 mark in the coming weeks. Then came a shake-up.
In October , Nike announced that ServiceNow CEO John Donahoe would succeed Mark Parker as chief executive in January 2020. Parker will stay on as the board’s executive chairman. The company also pulled its products from Amazon.com (AMZN) in November as it focused on direct-to-consumer sales.
Still, analysts have grown increasingly bullish about Nike’s transition toward a digitally-driven, direct-to-consumer brand. An analyst at Goldman Sachs upgraded the stock to Buy and added it to the firm’s conviction list , citing “evidence of building pricing power, signs of operating leverage, accelerating shift to differentiated retail, sharply scaling app ecosystem, and a constructive global athletic growth backdrop.”
That bullishness built as the stock rallied to a record close of $101.23 on Dec. 19. The gain was somewhat short-lived, as the stock pulled back a bit when it reported quarterly earnings that evening .
Raymond James analyst Matthew McClintock sees more gains ahead. He wrote in a note on Dec. 19 that he believes Nike’s innovation will soon drive “exceptional revenue growth going forward.” He raised his price target to $110 from $100.
He’s not alone. The average price target for the stock was recently $110.13, according to FactSet, as a swarm of analyst raised their targets and stayed bullish. Of the 30 analysts listed by FactSet, 73% have Buy or equivalent ratings.
But with the stock trading at 35 times trailing 12-month earnings, it will take even better execution to maintain that price target.
We’ll soon see if upcoming CEO Donahoe is up to the task.
Nike Stock Beat the S&P 500 in 2019. Here’s How.
