The last time the S&P 500’s total dividends declined from the previous year was in the aftermath of the financial crisis. Expect that to happen this year.
Howard Silverblatt, senior index analyst at S&P Dow Jones Indices, says an overall decline in dividend payments in 2020 “is very feasible” due to the coronavirus pandemic.
That warning marks a drastic turnabout from the start of the year, when Silverblatt was expecting dividend increases of about 9% for S&P 500 companies.
Among the S&P 500 companies suspending their payouts so far this year: Delta Air Lines (ticker: DAL), Boeing (BA), Ford Motor (F) and Freeport-McMoRan (FCX). Dividend cuts were imposed by energy companies Occidental Petroleum (OXY) and Apache (APA).
“More cuts and suspensions are expected, as companies move to limit expenses as cash-flow declines,” Silverblatt said in a note Tuesday.
Among those companies that previously put through dividend increases in April are Exxon Mobil (XOM), Johnson & Johnson (JNJ) and Procter & Gamble (PG). Investors will be watching these companies, and many others, closely to gauge trends. Dividends are considered an important signal for a company’s priorities.
The top five S&P 500 dividend payers in terms of cash outlays are Microsoft (MSFT), AT&T (T), Exxon Mobil, Apple (AAPL), and JPMorgan Chase (JPM).
Meanwhile, buyback suspensions have been more prevalent and are likely to increase. Among those suspending buybacks are eight large U.S. banks, including JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America (BAC), and various other companies, including Nordstrom (JWN) and AT&T.
First-quarter “buybacks should be significantly down, as the quarter was already half over when the virus hit the U.S,” Silverblatt said. Looking further out, he says, the second quarter and full year are expected to be dismal on buybacks.
For context, S&P 500 companies bought back $728.7 billion of shares in 2019, down nearly 10% from the record $806.4 billion in 2018.
There is also mounting political pressure to curtail stock buybacks. President Trump has said that any federal bailout money shouldn’t go to buybacks, and Democratic Presidential front-runner Joe Biden has called for a suspension of the practice for 12 months.
The last time the S&P 500’s total dividends declined from the previous year was in the aftermath of the financial crisis.
