U.S. stock benchmarks closed mixed Thursday, with the Dow pinned lower by a tumble in shares of 3M, amid a flurry of corporate quarterly results rolling out on Wall Street.
How are major indexes faring?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
, meanwhile, gained 5.77 points to 3,010.29, while the Nasdaq Composite Index COMP,
A quartet of Dow components and 45 of the companies that make up the S&P 500 index reported earnings in what will be the busiest day of the corporate earnings cycle, including Amazon.com AMZN,
The bifurcation in the markets reflects a split in the fortunes of big companies, said, Krishna Memani, vice chairman of investments at Invesco.  Investors are weighing commentary from 3M that suggests that “the industrial slowdown is continuing, as opposed to bottoming out,” Memani said. In contrast, the companies that power the Nasdaq are “doing quite well,” he said.
Doug Cote, chief market strategist at Voya Investment Management, said he remains bullish on the market overall, and said skittish investors haven’t been properly paying attention to positive signs in the economy.
“There is way too much pessimism in the market,” he said. “The market is focused on the headlines and really ignores the strong fundamentals underneath,” he added, referring to healthy gross domestic product in the U.S. and employment figures, in addition to corporate earnings that have come in better than expected.
Of the 168 S&P 500 companies that have reported third-quarter results thus far, 80.4% of them have come in above analysts’ consensus estimates and 13.1% have fallen below estimates. By comparison, on average 65% of companies beat estimates and 20% miss, going back to 1994, according to data from Refinitiv.
U.S. economic reports, however, were  mixed on Thursday, with durable-goods orders dropping 1.1% last month, the government said Thursday . Economists surveyed by MarketWatch had forecast a 0.8% decline. The decline over the past 12 months steepened to 5.4%, marking the biggest yearly drop-off since the middle of 2016. And sales of newly constructed homes in the U.S. decreased 0.7% on a monthly basis in September to a seasonally-adjusted annual rate of 701,000, the government reported Wednesday.
Meanwhile, U.S. initial jobless claims , a rough way to measure layoffs, fell by 6,000 to 212,000 in the seven days ended Oct. 19, holding near a 50-year low.
Overseas, European Central Bank President Mario Draghi delivered the final policy meeting of his tenure. His successor Christine Lagarde, the former International Monetary Fund chief, was in attendance at the policy meeting, Draghi confirmed at a news conference.
Draghi leaves Lagarde a fractious ECB that saw divisions over monetary easing measures embarked upon last month, including a recent spate of bond buying. The ECB left its main deposit facility rate at negative 0.5% and its main lending rate at 0%. The rate-setting Governing Council repeated that it expects to keep rates at “present or lower levels” until inflation, which has remained stubbornly low, “robustly” converges with its target of near but just below 2%. It also reiterated that it will begin a controversial bond-buying program at a pace of €20 billion a month beginning in November.
The ECB meeting comes ahead of the Federal Reserve’s two-day Oct. 29-30 policy meeting, where market participants are widely expecting a third consecutive interest rate cut of 25 basis points, as the central bank attempts to avert a slowdown that has gripped much of the developed world.
Outside of the U.S., the German economy, the largest in the European Union, is continuing to struggle, new data released Thursday show, with the difficulties of its export-oriented base extending to the service sector as global trade dries up.
The IHS Markit flash German manufacturing PMI inched up to 41.9 in October from September’s decade-worst 41.7, which is still a reading that shows the factory segment of the country’s economy in dire straits. Readings below 50 indicate contraction.
Which stocks are in focus?
