Lack of positivity with businesses, specifically among the CFOs
Top executives of the key S&P 500 agencies liquid stock amid COVID 19 pandemic.
IG Client Sentiment net-short positioning growing and sending the contrarian bullish signal.
The S&P 500 is on the road to recovery nearly all losses because the coronavirus pandemic sent the markets to a tailspin early this year. From the time the stock market shrank back in march, S&P 500 has gone into the climb over 40%. Nevertheless, the existing rally in the risk doesn’t seem trustworthy by the investors as the equity fundamental seems to lack or largely ignored.
No matter the case, this S&P 500 index goes to tick the higher even as the coronavirus infection rates get higher in the US. Since this relentless uptrend is primarily owed to the support flurry from fiscal and monetary authorities.
With this, in the wake of the lingering volatility and unprecedented times, closely following the market positioning and sentiment can provide key insights regarding the expected stock direction. One way to do this is to view the IG client sentiment that provides a view on the retail client positioning, drafted from the IG retail traders. It is vital to take note that the sentiments of the clients are geared as the contrarian indicator. Furthermore, extreme levels usually warrant paying great attention.
However, when looking at the insider transactions in the top 10 organizations in this S&P 500 through a market cap that contains almost 28% of this index weight, the bearish image emerges. Overall, excluding gifts and warrants that are usually scheduled transactions, equity selling with the 10 big companies largely outweighing insider buying, with the net sales being about $2.6 billion between march. This selling trend shows that corporate executives can predict the rough times for organizations.
In the same way, and based on the sentiments that are reflected by the existing insider transactions, data in the CFO optimism given by the Duke University’s Fuque Business school, shows the increasingly negative view of not the overall economy, but also in line with their own companies. As the most top executives that are responsible for managing the company’s finances, chief finance officers have a specific unique position for judging the project revenue path and the company earnings.
