Read more: 'Don't be stupid right now': The legendary author of 'Rich Dad, Poor Dad' breaks down why a coronavirus-led depression is inevitable — and shares the 3 investments he's making to stay safe
"Main Street should be feeling a slight sense of relief today," Seema Shah, the chief strategist at Principal Global Investors, told Business Insider. "The latest measures emphasize how committed the Fed is to providing relief and economic support where they can, stretching outside the typical toolkit in order to deliver assistance."
The Labor Department also reported on Thursday morning that weekly jobless claims hit 6.6 million in the week that ended April 4 . The number was slightly lower than last week's record, which was revised up to 6.7 million.
Still, nearly 17 million filings for unemployment insurance in three weeks is unprecedented, as the coronavirus outbreak continues to wreak havoc on the US economy.
"The catastrophic scale of the COVID-19 crisis is even more apparent," Ron Temple, head of US equities at Lazard Asset Management, told Business Insider. "While the Fed has acted quickly, it is critical that the fiscal stimulus in the CARES Act be delivered immediately and be of sufficient size to support the economy."
Stocks gave up some gains in afternoon trading when Senate Democrats moved to block Republicans' plan for $250 billion in aid for small businesses.
The proposed agreement emerged from a virtual meeting on Thursday in which OPEC+ outlined a deal to slash production by 10 million barrels a day. That fell far short of the expected demand decline of 35 million barrels per day in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic.
Investors also watched the news about the pandemic. US deaths from COVID-19, the illness caused by the coronavirus, were at more than 16,000 on Thursday, with about 450,000 cases. Globally, there were more than 1.5 million cases and 94,000 deaths. Some countries in Asia have seen a resurgence in cases after lifting protective lockdowns , sparking fear that the same could happen elsewhere.
Further, consumer sentiment slumped by the most on record in early April, according to a preliminary reading released Thursday by the University of Michigan's Surveys of Consumers.
"Consumers need to be prepared for a longer and deeper recession rather than the now discredited message that pent-up demand will spark a quick, robust, and sustained economic recovery," Richard Curtin, the chief economist of the Surveys of Consumers, said in a statement.
