Japan’s NIKKEI also begins the day on a negative side, -0.20% to 19,309.
Comments from US diplomats counter the coronavirus data.
Market’s risk-on recently got a push from US President Donald Trump and Vice President Mike Pence as Tokyo open for trading on Thursday. As a result, worrisome coronavirus (COVID-19) figures from the US failed to shake the trading sentiment.
In his routine Coronavirus Task Force Briefings, US President Trump mentioned that we are much closer to getting our country back to where it was. Also supporting the market’s risk-tone were comments from Vice President Pence who said there are at least four clinical trials studying coronavirus treatment Hydroxychloroquine. On Wednesday, the US got the much-needed drug from India for clinical trials that are targeted to find a cure for the pandemic.
Earlier during the day, data from New York and New Jersey pushed the US to register the second-highest virus-led deaths in the world after Italy. Also on the risk-negative side could be France extending its lockdown and comments from the Dallas Fed President Robert Kaplan.
Even so, the US 10-year Treasury yields rise to 0.78% whereas S&P 500 Futures flash 0.26% gains to 2,742 by the press time. It should also be noted that Japan’s NIKKEI begins the day’s trading on the back foot around 19,300, alike the US stock futures.
Looking forward, investors will keep eyes on the coronavirus updates whereas the nearby speech from the BOJ Governor Haruhiko Kuroda and US data could offer intermediate direction.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
