This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
S&P 500 Dividends Could Be Better Than You Think This Year, Analysts Say
S&P 500 companies will eke out a 1% increase in their dividend payouts this year, a Wells Fargo research note concludes.
That’s “despite several high-profile, post-COVID-19 dividend cuts,” according to senior analysts Christopher Harvey and Gary Liebowitz.
Among the S&P 500 companies that have suspended or cut their dividends in the wake of the pandemic are Delta Air Lines (ticker: DAL), Marriott International (MAR), Carnival (CCL) , Occidental Petroleum (OXY), and Apache (APA).
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
“History suggests uber-cap companies will reduce dividends only if absolutely necessary,” they observe.
Those three companies combined to pay out more than $40 billion in dividends on their common stock last year, according to FactSet.
Harvey and Liebowitz also point out that even the most challenged firms paid first-quarter dividends. That puts a little less pressure on the overall S&P 500 dividend results for 2020.
An example is Marriott, whose first-quarter dividend of 48 cents a share was payable on March 31.
A swing factor in the Wells Fargo dividend analysis is the banks , which for now at least plan to continue to pay their dividends. Eight of the largest banks, including JPMorgan Chase (JPM), Citigroup (C), Bank of America (BAC) and Wells Fargo (WFC), have suspended their share buybacks, leaving more capital available to pay dividends.
The analysts are expecting S&P 500 dividends to total $59 a share this year, well above the $46-$47 the futures market is discounting. They suggest that some investors may be conflating a 20%-plus cut in S&P profit forecasts with dividend cuts. “We do not think one necessarily follows the other. Market volatility, investor sentiment and liquidity likely contribute to the discount,” they wrote.
S&P 500 Dividends Could Be Better Than You Think This Year, Analysts Say
S&P 500 companies will eke out a 1% increase in their dividend payouts this year, a Wells Fargo research note concludes.
