Major U.S. stock-market benchmarks ended Monday’s session at records as investors remained attuned to developments in the U.S.-China trade relationship and cheered a wave of merger activity.
How did the major benchmarks fare?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
advanced 190.85 points, or 0.7%, to end at 28,066.47,  while the Nasdaq Composite COMP,
climbed 112.60 points, or 1.3%, to 8,632.49. The S&P 500 index SPX,
ended 23.35 points higher at 3,133.64, a gain of 0.8%.
The Dow ended the day above its previous closing high of 28,036.22  set Nov. 18, the S&P 500 surpassed its previous closing record of 8,570.66 set on Nov. 19, while the Nasdaq finished the session above its last closing high of 3,122.03 set on Nov. 18. All three benchmarks also set new intraday highs on Monday.
Analysts said investors remain sensitive to headlines around U.S.-China trade talks, with remarks Saturday by Robert O’Brien, the U.S. national security adviser, in the spotlight. O’Brien told reporters at a security conference in Halifax that a “phase-one” deal between the U.S. and China by the end of the year still appeared possible, Reuters reported , while also warning that the U.S. would not “turn a blind eye to what’s happening in Hong Kong or what’s happening in the South China Sea, or other areas of the world where we’re concerned about China’s activity.”
Contributing to the positive tone, the Chinese government on Sunday released a document calling for more protection of intellectual-property rights.
“The Chinese government have typically offered to purchase more agricultural goods from the U.S., but that will only gain a limited amount of traction with the Trump administration, but genuine progress regarding IP could help get phase one wrapped up,” said David Madden, market analyst at CMC, in a note.
Meanwhile, the pro-democracy opposition in Hong Kong swept to a resounding victory in weekend elections, winning a commanding majority in the vote for 452 district council seats. District councils have little power, but the showing could put pressure on the government to negotiate with protesters demanding democratic elections for the city’s legislature and chief executive. The result is also seen as a defeat for Beijing , which has pushed Hong Kong to crack down on protests.
On the economic front, the Chicago Fed’s national activity index for October fell to a reading of negative-0.71, from negative-0.45 in the previous month. The Dallas Fed manufacturing index rose to a negative-1.3 in November from negative-5.1 in October.
Investors will hear from Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell at 7 p.m. Eastern, when he is scheduled to deliver a speech on building gains on a long expansion.
What stocks were in focus?
