S&P 500 futures lick wounds after the drop overnight.
Cautious market mood weighs on the US equity futures.
All eyes remain on Trump’s China announcement.
The futures on the S&P 500 index are nursing losses above the 3000 level, as the bears take a breather following the slump overnight.
The US futures reversed this week’s recovery mode and fell sharply, tracking the declines in the US indices after US President Donald Trump announced Thursday about the Friday presser on his response to China’s forceful advancement in Hong Kong’s security and civic liberties.
The tensions between the US and China ratcheted up last week after China proposed the National Security Legislation on Hong Kong, which was approved by the country’s parliament on Thursday.
The world’s two biggest economies were already battling out over the mishandling of the coronavirus outbreak by Beijing. Therefore, the Hong Kong issue has dampened the investors’ sentiment further. Markets continue to remain worried as the escalation could re-ignite the trade war between both countries.
Heading into the Trump’s presser due at 1800 GMT later in the NA session, the risk remains to the downside for the S&P 500 futures. Meanwhile, the US dollar also remains weighed down by the month-end liquidation play, offering little help to the stock futures.
Ahead of the presser, traders could also take cues from the US macro data releases for near-term trading opportunities.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
