Case growth remaining contained, policy remaining accommodative and the reopening process going smoothly have driven the S&P 500 Index to its best quarter the fourth quarter of 1998. But with case growth accelerating and the future direction of fiscal policy uncertain, two of these pillars have been called into question. Therefore, risks are skewed to the downside, according to David Lebovitz from JP Morgan who discards a retest of March lows though.
“From a policy perspective, this makes it increasingly important that the unemployment benefits which are set to expire at the end of July are extended in the coming weeks. On the growth front, given that the direction of the data has been a more significant driver of markets than the level, the path forward for the economy will be monitored closely. However, we have far more information in hand than was the case three months ago; the risks to valuation are tilted to the downside, but a re-test of the March lows seem like a bit of a stretch.”
“The fundamentals are becoming increasingly important, and over the next few weeks, companies will begin reporting second-quarter profits. The silver lining to the upcoming earnings season is companies may start to provide some guidance as to what they expect over the remainder of the year and into 2021. That said, we acknowledge that the distribution of outcomes remains wide, and maintain that the best investment approach will be one characterized by balance between quality and cyclicality.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
