S&P 500 Futures down 0.60%, 17.00 points, amid the latest shift in risk-tone.
Doubts over the US economic re-open gain momentum after the virus figures.
UK PM Johnson’s cautious approach, shooting in Canada add burden onto the risk-tone.
S&P 500 Futures portray the return of skepticism, after Friday’s risk-on, during the early Asian session on Monday. The US equity futures decline 0.60% to 2,852 by the press time.
The Trump administration’s guidelines to re-open the US economy in a phased manner, coupled with promising results of the Gilead’s Remdesivir clinical trials, offered positive trade sentiment on Friday.
However, the weekend report from Reuters mentions that the US death toll due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) crossed 40,000 with over 744,000 infections.
Further weighing on the risk could be the report from The Times that suggests UK PM Boris Johnson being very cautious about re-opening the economy, in contrast to the Chancellor Rishi Sunak.
Additionally, mass shootings in Canada, killing at least 10 people including gunmen, as per the Washington Post, also exert downside pressure on the market’s risk-tone.
While also portraying the trading sentiment, the US 10-year Treasury yields drop 1.3 basis points (bps) to 0.643% by the press time.
Moving on, traders will keep eyes on the virus updates from the US as President Donald Trump recently expects the answer on the deal on additional stimulus. Moreover, Vice President Mike Pence is also likely to talk with state governors and might offer additional details concerning the economic restart.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
