The daily chart of the S&P 500 futures shows a bullish breakout.
Upbeat US jobs data would bolster the bullish technical bias.
The futures tied to S&P 500, Wall Street's equity index, jumped 0.42% on Wednesday, confirming an upside break of trendline falling from June 10 and June 23 highs.
The breakout has opened the doors for a test of immediate resistance at $3,134 (the lower high created on June 23), which, if breached, would shift the focus to the high of $3,227 reached on June 8.
The case for a rally toward recent highs would strengthen if the US Nonfarm Payrolls data for the June beat estimates.
The data due at 12:30 GMT on Friday is expected to show the US economy added 3,000K jobs in June following May's 2509K additions. However, the jobless rate is forecasted to have increased to 7.7% from 7.3%. Meanwhile, Average Hourly Earnings are expected to have risen by 5.3% year-on-year in June, marking a slowdown from May's increase of 6.7%.
Stocks may feel the pull of gravity if the jobs data disappoints estimates by a big margin, although pullbacks could be short-lived, as the Federal Reserve is injecting liquidity into the system at a frantic pace.
From a technical analysis standpoint, the bias in the S&P 500 futures would turn bearish below $3,000.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
