Coronavirus fears weigh on major equity indexes in the US.
Gap Inc (GPS) after company announces collaboration with Kanye West.
Financial shares suffer heavy losses with HBAN as the top-decliner.
Wall Street's main indexes started the day sharply lower and extended the slide amid heightened concerns over the surging number of confirmed coronavirus cases. As of writing, the S&P 500 was down 1.8% on the day, the Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite were losing 2.3% and 1.75%, respectively.
Earlier in the day, Gap Inc (GPS) announced that they have reached a 10-year agreement with Kanye West to create a clothing line titled 'Yeezy.' Boosted by this development, GPS climbed to its highest level since early March at $14.45 and was up more than 40% at one point earlier in the session. As of writing, GPS was up nearly 20% on the day at $12,15 as the top-performer.
On the other hand, financial stocks are staying under heavy selling pressure on Friday as the 10-year US Treasury bond yield is dropping by more than 6%. At the moment, the S&P 500 Financials Index (SPSY) is down 3.88% as the biggest decliner among the major sectors.
Huntington Bancshares (HBAN), Goldman Sachs Group Inc (GS) and Capital One Financial Corp (COF) shares are slumping by 10.4%, 8.4% and 8%, respectively.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
