Large public companies will cut their cash spending in 2020 by record amounts, reducing outlays on capital expenditures, research and development and buybacks and dividends in a move that could further weaken the U.S. economy, according to analysts at Goldman Sachs.
“We forecast S&P 500 cash spending will decline by an annual record 33% during 2020 as firms prioritize liquidity in a worsening economic environment,” wrote Goldman analysts, led by David Kostin, in a weekend research note. They also predicted that capex will decline by 27%, R&D by 9%, and cash acquisition spending by 49%.
In total, Goldman predicts that investment for growth by large-cap U.S. firms will fall by $350 billion in 2020, with the decline in capex greater on a percentage basis than the decline seen peak-to-trough during the financial crisis.
Steven Blitz, chief U.S. economist at TS Lombard told MarketWatch that this drop off in corporate spending will deal a serious blow to the U.S. economy. He sees the U.S. economy continuing to contract in the third quarter—by 7.6% after a 17.7% decline in the second—in part because of a lack of business investment.
“One of the reasons we are negative on third-quarter GDP is that we believe the market are underestimating the extent to which firms will be looking to repair their balance sheets through caps on employment (or reducing head count), caps on wages and cutting back or eliminating bonuses, and sharply reducing capital expenditures,” he wrote in an email.
“As this contraction goes on, the knock-on effects continue to grow and the negative impact on capex is where many, including the markets, are not yet focusing.”
Meanwhile, additional pullbacks in spending on share repurchases and dividends could act as a more direct drag on stock-market valuations. Goldman predicts share repurchases will decline by 50% to $371 billion while aggregate S&P 500 dividends will decrease by 23% to $398 billion.
“The decline in share repurchases will have a significant impact on the equity market,” Kostin said in a previous note on the topic, adding that corporations have been a major buyer of equities during the past 10 years.
“Reduced demand from the principal buyer of shares during the past decade means wider trading ranges, less downside support, and slower earnings-per-share growth,” he wrote.
Stocks were putting in a mixed performance Monday after trimming or erasing big early losses. The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
