The flood of new retail investors via the likes of Robinhood is widely believed to be behind the meteoric rise in the U.S. stock market. Yet, per Yahoo Finance, Barclays has argued the contrary:
But in a research note circulated to clients Friday, Barclays said no, "Robinhood is not behind the rally." Using the popular Robintrack database that offers insight on most popular positions and changes, analysts from Barclays Investment Sciences wrote that since March 2020, when the market bottomed out, stocks have generally done worse when Robinhood users get interested.
"We have seen the opposite of the conventional wisdom-all else equal, more Robinhood customers moving into a stock has corresponded to lower returns, rather than higher," the analysts wrote.
In our opinion, even though the jump in retail stock holdings has coincided with the melt-up in S&P 500, short covering by large speculators may have been a bigger contributor. Based on data from the Commitment of Traders report, large speculators have been caught wrongfooted after piling on short positions in E-mini S&P 500 futures over the course of this rally:
As shown above, the net short positioning of more than 30k contracts parallels that during market bottoms in 2015 and 2012, after which the short covering rallies would continue until large speculators capitulate to the long side. A replay would most certainly lead to higher highs ahead in SPY.
On the heels of a dovish Fed who has committed to keeping the foot on the gas last Wednesday , the recent rise in bond yields was abruptly halted with 10-year Treasury yields plunging 20+ bps off multi-month highs just under 1%. In turn, SPY's trailing 12-month dividend yield has remained solidly above the 10-year Treasury yield even after the 40+% rally in stocks:
Over the past 10 years, there were 3 other instances when SPY's dividend yield crossed above the 10-year Treasury for an extended period of time, all of which followed with a multi-year bull run in SPY as the great rotation from bonds into stocks ensued:
Though, protracted negative growth in S&P 500's earnings and dividends poses the biggest risk to the bullish outlook. To wit from Goldman Sachs on MarketWatch :
But while the S&P 500 has rallied 39% from its March 23 low, the market for long-dated dividend futures has risen just 7%, according to a Thursday note from Goldman Sachs, reflecting concerns over earnings growth and rising chances that a Democratic sweep in the November elections will lead to a reversal of the 2017 corporate tax cuts.
That said, persistently low interest rates thanks to the Fed's continued dovish stance most likely will help cushion the projected 30% drop in SPY's dividend payout until earnings growth picks up again.
To summarize, positive technical picture and relative value to bonds suggest the massive bull run in S&P 500 is not over just yet. Potential short covering by large speculators, who have held on to lopsidedly short positions in S&P 500 futures, could fuel further upside as well. We expect dips to continue being bought at the key 50-day and 200-day moving averages, and all-time highs in SPY to be retested sometime this summer.
Disclosure: I am/we are long SPX. I wrote this article myself, and it expresses my own opinions. I am not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). I have no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.
Additional disclosure: We may have intraday options, futures or other derivative positions in the above tickers mentioned.
