This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Tesla Stock Looks Like It’s Joining the S&P 500. Here’s How to Calculate the Impact.
Updated July 2, 2020 11:31 am ET / Original July 2, 2020 7:00 am ET
Tesla stock’s potential inclusion in the S&P 500 index has Tesla bulls buzzing. Index inclusion is a good thing, but it isn’t everything. There are a few things to consider before buying Tesla stock ahead of any indexing announcement.
For starters, index inclusion isn’t guaranteed , but second quarter delivery estimates, which smashed Wall Street expectations, makes inclusion look increasingly likely.
The S&P 500 has multiple criteria for index inclusion. The ones investors have focused on recently are positive GAAP profit over a 12-month period and positive earnings in the most recently reported quarter.
GAAP is short for generally accepted accounting practices. It amounts to earnings without fancy, company-specific adjustments .
Tesla (ticker: TSLA) has generated about $1.42 in positive GAAP earnings per share over the past three quarters. Analysts expect the company lose $1.58 a share on a GAAP basis in the second quarter. Not good enough, but that estimate also looks very stale.
Tesla delivery estimates , after all, were rising faster than per-share earnings estimates. Second-quarter vehicle delivery estimates bottomed out at about 66,000 vehicles a few weeks back amid pandemic pain. Delivery estimates are back up to about 75,000 vehicles coming into Thursday morning. The top estimate was about 86,000 vehicles. Tesla delivered more than 90,000 units. It’s an impressive number.
Tesla delivered about 88,000 cars in the first quarter and produced a GAAP profit of 8 cents a share.
Beating an estimated per-share loss of $1.58 seems easy. So does positive earnings over the past 12 months. The tougher criterion to meet for index inclusion looks to still be positive earnings per share in the most recently reported quarter. There is, however, the matter of the global pandemic . Even if Tesla doesn’t turn a profit S&P officials have discretion. “The committee can use its discretion when it makes sense,” said an S&P spokesperson to Barron’s. Still, there is no guarantee such discretion will be exercised.
Investors are acting, however, like inclusion is a fait accompli. Shares are up about 36% over the past month. Gains have pushed Tesla past Toyota Motor (TM), making Elon Musk’s company the most valuable car company on earth.
The reason for all the excitement is index inclusion means many mutual funds, exchange-traded funds, and, of course, index funds that track or benchmark themselves to the S&P have to go and buy Tesla stock. A bolus of buy orders is bullish. The technical reason, after all, any stock goes up is more buy orders than sell orders.
Of course, company fundamentals are supposed to drive an order imbalance, but technical factors, such as a short squeeze or index inclusion, can do it too, from time to time.
“Being added to the S&P 500 index certainly would be quite an accomplishment for any company, Tesla included, but I’m not sure how big it would be for the stock,” Baird managing director and trader Greg Gaynor tells Barron’s. There is typically a bump in demand from funds upon inclusion, up to 25 million shares in the case of Tesla, according to Gaynor. “It’s just a question of how much of that has been pre-traded.”
Index funds are rarely caught completely off guard. Meaning, today’s rally could be tomorrow’s index inclusion .
The S&P 500 is weighted by market capitalization. The total capitalization of the S&P is about $27 trillion. Adding in Tesla, while bumping out another company, would give Tesla roughly a 0.8% index weight. (Barron’s didn’t adjust for other factors like float—share available for trading.)
The Vanguard S&P 500 ETF (VOO) and the SPDR S&P 500 ETF (SPY), two big index funds, for instance, would need to purchase about three million Tesla shares to get up to the appropriate weighting. And they are two of many index funds.
The amount of stock to buy matters, but so does how Tesla stock trades. Tesla shares are very actively trading. Volume averages about 11 million shares a day. So the index effect, based on Gaynor’s rough figures, represents about 2 to 3 days of typical volume. That isn’t all that much. Having a more liquid, rapidly trading stock makes any potential indexing impact smaller.
Playing down any index effect isn’t a pan of Tesla stock. Tesla can still beat earnings, exciting investors. In fact, a big positive earnings surprise would likely be preferred to index inclusion. It probably would have a longer-lasting impact on Tesla shares.
Investors could be forgiven if they thought Tesla was in the index already. The company is bigger, by market value, than every other auto component of the S&P combined. What’s more, Tesla’s market value would be just outside the top 20 companies in the entire index. Tesla is, in short, an electric vehicle behemoth .
Tesla stock is up about 190% year to date as of Wednesday’s closing price, far exceeding comparable returns of the S&P, Dow Jones Industrial Average, as well as automotive peers.
The Tesla run continues Thursday morning. Shares are up about 6.6% after the strong deliver numbers and a price target increase from Wedbush analyst Dan Ives .
Tesla Stock Looks Like It’s Joining the S&P 500. Here’s How to Calculate the Impact.
Tesla stock’s potential inclusion in the S&P 500 index has Tesla bulls buzzing.
