The S&P 500 should be 13% lower because a recession is coming, warns Deutsche Bank
Critical information for the U.S. trading day
Investors are keeping a wary eye on oil after weekend attacks on Saudi Arabia crude facilities triggered the largest one-day gain for the commodity since 2008, and plenty of risk-off action all over.
The cautious tone looks here to stay as attention turns to the two-day Federal Reserve meeting starting on Tuesday.
Not that it matters, says our call of the day, from Binky Chadha, Deutsche Bank’s chief global strategist and head of asset allocation, in an interview with MarketWatch.
He warns a U.S. recession is on the doorstep, the Fed can’t help and the S&P 500 SPX,
is ignoring all of the warning signs.
“We are cautious on stocks. We would argue you want to be defensively positioned [and] we would argue that the U.S. equity market has run way, way ahead of growth,” says Chadha.
The S&P, he notes, tends to be “very strongly correlated” with indicators of cyclical growth like the Institute for Supply Management survey (ISM), which fell into contraction territory last month. It suggests the index should be at 2,600, not at current levels just below 3,000, which appear to price in a “good solid rebound” for the ISM.
Elsewhere, he says annual U.S. jobs growth slowed from 2.5% in the middle of last year to 1.3% last month, marking the weakest expansion in 10 years, and nearing “stall-speed” for the economy.
“Every time payrolls growth has gone below 1%, the U.S. has ended up in recession. We would argue the U.S. economy is dangerously close to...tipping into recession,” he said, adding that the fate of the economy hinges on one thing - the trade war.
He said a market sell off would make President Trump more likely to relent on trade policy.
“I would argue that’s a necessary condition for growth to bottom and rebound and or the stock market to go up in a sustainable way,” he says.
If that doesn’t happen, Chadha says he will kiss goodbye his own “very bullish” year-end S&P forecast of 3,250.
Oil US:CLV19 is reversing some of Monday’s historic gains, as another weak day builds for stocks, with Dow YM00,
