The S&P 500 has to hold this level or risk a 10% correction, warns strategist
Critical information for the U.S. trading day
Those pinning hopes on a rebound for stocks after Monday’s brutal equity selloff are in for a nervous day.
Stocks are attempting to rally after a choppy morning and New York traders are waking up to find coronavirus headlines are no less worrying on Tuesday. It may just be too soon for some investors to take up Monday’s advice from Berkshire Hathaway’s Warren Buffett, who suggested they could use a selloff to buy a stock they like for even cheaper.
In short, it takes a “brave soul to be buying these markets,” notes Chris Weston, head of research at Australian forex broker Pepperstone, who provides our call of the day.
“When countries are closing borders, the threat of an outbreak is becoming more pronounced in Europe and the Middle East and supply chains are just going to be more disrupted, how do we model risk when we can’t even model economics with any confidence?” Weston asks.
He says any investors tempted to buy stocks right now should keep an eye on this important level on the S&P SPX,
“If we see price head through 3200, then it will lead to even higher volatility and risk of a 10% drawdown. The bulls need to defend this level or its good night Vienna,” said Weston, who provides the following chart of the S&P 500, which closed down 3.3% to 3,225.89 on Monday.
Now for some advice from a trader who has recently tried to profit from a couple of coronavirus-related drops for equities.
Jani Ziedins, the trader behind the Cracked Market blog , says he dipped a toe in after the market tumbled on a Friday three weeks ago on the first wave of coronavirus headlines. “That trade worked out brilliantly as the market rallied nearly 200-points over the next two weeks and I was fortunate enough to lock in profits near the highs,” he writes.
But he says trying that same move last Friday hasn’t really worked out too well, given Monday’s big rout. However, he bought small, so ended up with a smallish pile of losses. “This is a buyable dip, the only question is when,” says Ziedins.
