Strong, powerful bounces of 10%, 15% 20%? Expect them.
Nothing says “bear market” like urgent buying. Monday’s rally was a good sign in that the S&P 500 was able to cross through one significant level (2,640) that had been a barrier recently. But this is all still new, and short-term.
Furthermore, the market, the charts, fundamental analysis and just about anything else that works in “normal” times can be thrown off for periods of time. That in itself is a good enough reason to be investing with above-average caution for a while.
The risks are right in front of us...do we see them?
But "buying the dip" and hanging in there" will get old very, very quickly. So will chasing monster rallies, like Monday’s, if they run out of steam quickly. And in bear markets, they typically do. The stock market is not your financial enemy. At a time like this, complacency and overconfidence are.
I closely track a variety of indicators, technical and otherwise. But for the sake of brevity, here is a short list of S&P 500 price levels that I consider to be milestones on the way to busting out of the bear market, or dragging us further into one.
The S&P 500 gets more bullish-looking if...
...it gets to above 2,880 and then 3,130. The latter figure would be about 10% below the February peak.
The S&P 500 gets more bearish-looking if...
...it drops below 2,600, then heads to and through 2,200, the recent low. That’s about 35% below the S&P’s all-time high. At that point, the media will be filled with cries of a “failed re-test of the lows.” And you know what? They’d be right to be concerned! The next solid targets I see below 2,200 are 1,800 and 1,600.
1,600 - you mean, like Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington D.C.?
Actually, it’s just a coincidence. But the 1,600 level in the S&P 500 is plenty significant for technicians. That would be just over 50% down from the all-time high.
The last 2 bear markets (Dot-Com Bubble and Financial Crisis) fell by roughly 50% each. Something for all investors to consider, unless they just assume that this is all a blip on the radar. That’s a chance no investor should take.
I hope that chart perspective helps you size up your own portfolio, or those you oversee for others. These days, rules and records are being broken everywhere in the stock market. But that doesn’t mean we should ever lose sight of the baseline: have a process, have a plan, and follow it.
Comments provided are informational only, not individual investment advice or recommendations. Sungarden provides Advisory Services through Dynamic Wealth Advisors.
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former mutual fund manager.  My work for Forbes.com aims to break investment myths and bring common sense analysis to my audience. My firm's website is www.SungardenInvestment.com.  Connect with me on Linked In, follow me on Twitter @robisbitts. Financial Advisors can visit www.TheHedgedInvestor.com for more.
