Workers distribute a food bank donation in Brooklyn, N.Y.
Whenever the market drops, investors start worrying about whether the floor is really in . They should be worrying about the ceiling instead.
It was certainly a tough week for stocks. The Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 645.90 points, or 2.7%, to 23,685.42, while the S&P 500 index fell 2.3%, to 2863.70, and the Nasdaq Composite declined 1.2%, to 9014.56. It was the Dow’s and the Nasdaq’s worst week since the week ended April 3, and the S&P 500’s worst since the week ended March 20.
Value Stocks Look Cheaper Than Ever. How to Play a Rebound.
Oh, the market had plenty of reasons to fall. Thanks to Covid-19, the economic data continue to be terrifying—nearly 3 million additional people filed for jobless claims , retail sales suffered the largest plunge on record , and industrial production cratered . Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell spoke and t hrew the stimulus ball back into Congress’s court . Congress, for its part, doesn’t seem inclined to bridge the gap between the parties to get something done. Throw in rising tensions between the U.S. and China , and not even tech giants like Apple (ticker: AAPL) and Amazon.com (AMZN) could keep the market afloat.
Sometimes, though, the reasons are just what we slap into a column after the fact to explain what looks obvious on the chart. Monday began with the S&P 500 trying—and failing—to break its April closing high of 2939.51. No biggie. The index tried again on Tuesday morning, hitting 2945.82 before falling back. And then it kept falling. With that, the ceiling was in.
Having such an obvious resistance level doesn’t mean the market is heading for a fall. The S&P 500’s ability to bounce back from early-day losses on Thursday and Friday is a sign that some investors still want to buy the dip. But it does make it harder to see the market heading much higher just yet.
“If [the S&P 500] continues to fail, you’ll hear about topping patterns, lower highs, exhaustion, and a lack of momentum,” says Frank Cappelleri, a technical analyst at Nomura Instinet.
But that top could be more impenetrable now that tensions between the U.S. and China are heating up again. The week started with reports that the Trump administration wants to prevent the federal government’s Thrift Savings Plan from allowing savers to invest in Chinese stocks . By the end of the week, the administration announced that it would limit the ability of China’s Huawei Technologies to get the parts and technology it needs from overseas suppliers .
“The Huawei restrictions will be viewed as a shot across China’s bow,” says Dave Donabedian, chief investment officer at CIBC Private Wealth Management. “That’s going to be difficult for the market to manage over the next several months.”
The focus, however, remains on the impact that Covid-19 is having on the U.S. economy. As the country reopens, we know that some of the data will start to look better. The risk is that lawmakers might look at that data and feel as if the current stimulus has already done enough.
For instance, when April’s personal income numbers are released at the end of May , they likely will show that total income surged even as job losses spiked, due to government checks and expanded unemployment benefits.
Those programs will expire, though, and when they do, it’s unlikely that enough jobs will have returned to make up for the difference, explains Aneta Markowska, an economist at Jefferies. “Policy makers may be winning the race for now, but without additional fiscal support, Covid-19 will be back in the lead by the middle of the summer,” she writes.
That fiscal support could be hard to come by. While House Democrats are ready to pass a $3 trillion bill , many Senate Republicans would rather wait and see whether another package is needed. If the two sides can’t agree on a plan, they risk a “Hoover moment,” says Jared Woodard, investment strategist at BofA Securities. “When the government requires a shutdown of economic activity, the logical corollary is for the state to provide the support for what’s lost,” he says. “If it’s a quarter of GDP, so be it. If it’s two quarters, so be it. The alternative is a depression.”
Woodard doesn’t think it gets that far, but the S&P 500 may have to take a 7.5% slide to 2650 before the two parties come together to make a deal.
And if they can’t? Then we can start worrying again about whether the bottom will be retested.
The S&P 500 Was Stopped in Its Tracks Last Week. Here’s Why Another Drop Could Be in the Offing.
Whenever the market drops, investors start worrying about whether the floor is really in.
