Tyler Technologies gets a spot on the coveted S&P 500 Index, joining the big leagues with Facebook and Apple
The Plano company was surprised to learn along with everyone else that it was being added to the S&P 500 Index. "I'm not sure anyone ever got an official call," CEO Lynn Moore said.
Plano-based Tyler Technologies will be added to the all-important S&P 500 Index, effective Monday.(Tyler Technologies)
Plano-based software company Tyler Technologies will be joining the likes of Facebook and Apple with a spot on the coveted S&P 500 Index, effective Monday.
Tyler and two California-based companies are replacing Harley-Davidson Inc., Nordstrom Inc. and Alliance Data Systems Corp., which are moving to the S&P MidCap 400. Joining Tyler in the S&P 500 are life sciences firm Bio Rad Laboratories and industrial conglomerate Teledyne Technologies.
The index, widely regarded as the best single gauge of large company stocks, covers about 80% of the total market value of the U.S. stock market with $11.2 trillion indexed or benchmarked to it.
The requirements to be added to the list are pretty basic. First, the company needs to be big, meaning it has a market cap of at least $8.2 billion. Market capitalization refers to the total value of a company’s stock shares.
Tyler’s market cap is over $13 billion.
Another requirement is that the total profit from the past four quarters must be positive when added together. Tyler has zero debt and has recorded 34 straight quarters of double-digit growth.
The addition was quite the surprise for Tyler, a 5,000-employee firm that provides software exclusively for schools, cities and other government offices. Previously, it was a member of the S&P MidCap 400 Index.
“I’m not sure anyone ever got an official call,” said Lynn Moore, Tyler Technologies CEO, with a chuckle. “I didn’t even know we were being considered but it’s certainly an honor to be considered and to make the list.”
Being added to the index is a badge of honor for companies, but any list revisions are kept top secret among S&P’s selection committee. The group meets once a month to discuss possible changes to the index, which it updates once a quarter based on companies changing in size or a change in requirements.
Tyler Technologies, founded in 1966, also joined another prestigious list in the past year -- publicly traded companies in Dallas-Fort Worth with $1 billion or more in annual revenue. The company, which switched to exclusively serving the public sector in 1998, has clients across all 50 states and brought in $1.086 billion in revenue in 2019.
“Hitting $1 billion was very rewarding and reflects a lot of hard work from a lot of people,” Moore said. “I remember when we crossed the $100 million mark and that was quite a milestone. And at some point, I’m sure we’ll cross the $2 billion mark.”
