“The minister of health has spoken about possible actions after the 21 days, but he’s not said that the lockdown will continue,” said Langenhoven, who was speaking on April 2. “They said there might be some restrictions continuing or actions being taken after the 21 days; I would imagine that all depends on the rate of increases and the rate of infection.”
A South African Reserve Bank report released on Monday (April 6) notes that the country’s economy was already experiencing growth challenges before the pandemic, and these issues have only been made worse by the continuing spread of the virus and subsequent lockdown.
“South Africa was already in recession prior to the COVID-19 shock, and the situation has become more challenging since,” it reads.
The central bank update also states that a previous economic growth forecast rate of -0.2 percent was “probably too optimistic,” and it has since revised the outlook.
“More recent work suggests 2020 growth will be in a range of -2 percent to -4 percent, with downside risks should the lockdown be extended, or if the global economy weakens more than currently projected,” the report explains.
But there is a glimmer of hope in the reserve bank’s long-term projections.
“Further out, there is limited scope for a rebound, but growth is now unlikely to exceed 1 percent in 2021. The upside risk to this forecast, however, is that a deeper contraction this year would permit a stronger rebound in 2021,” the South African Reserve Bank notes.
There is also growing concern about the impact lockdowns related to COVID-19 could have on the economy of Southern Africa as neighboring countries begin implementing their own mandatory shutdowns.
This is an updated version of an article first published by the Investing News Network in April 2020.
Don’t forget to follow us @INN_Resource for real-time updates!
Securities Disclosure: I, Georgia Williams, hold no direct investment interest in any company mentioned in this article.
Editorial Disclosure: The Investing News Network does not guarantee the accuracy or thoroughness of the information reported in the interviews it conducts. The opinions expressed in these interviews do not reflect the opinions of the Investing News Network and do not constitute investment advice. All readers are encouraged to perform their own due diligence.
