The Bottom Line: Now that your ship has come in, and you are ready to buy a full size Luxury Yacht sized SUV, Nissan has the one you have been looking for. Meet the 2020 Nissan Armada. This a full size, 3 row, body on frame, V/8 powered, large SUV that can seat 8 and tow 8,500 pounds. The Armada competes with the Chevrolet Suburban, Ford Expedition, Toyota Land Cruiser and similar large SUV’s. The biggest change for 2020 is the addition of a new 22″ Wheel Package with 22 x 8 inch 14 spoke forged aluminum alloy wheels and 275/50R 22″ all season tires, and heated outside mirrors are now standard on all model levels.
The full size Armada is Nissan’s largest SUV, and it sits above the Pathfinder, Murano, Rogue, and Juke crossovers. With a starting price of only $47,100, the 2020 Nissan Armada is one of the least expensive large SUVs on the market. The Armada’s three higher trims start at $51,900, $60,530, and $63,530. This week, Nissan sent me a top of the line Platinum Reserve Edition 4WD 4 wheel drive Armada to review with a total MSRP manufactures suggested retail price of  $71,730. While that sounds like a lot of money, it’s $10,000 to $15,000 less than the competition, at this level of refinement and luxury appointments.
The Armada Platinum Reserve 4WD Edition starts with a base price of $63,530. The options on the test SUV are: Premium Pearl White paint for $395, the Platinum Reserve Package for $2,250, Carpeted floor mats for $320, Illuminated Kick Plates for $390, Carpeted Captain’s Seating and Reserve Edition cargo mat for $355, Welcome Lighting package for $395, the 22″ alloy wheel and 275/50R tire package for $2,250 and the second row Captain’s Chairs package for $450. The total MSRP price including the $1,395 destination charge came to $71,730.
For almost $72 Grand you get a fantastic running, driving and performing AWD all wheel drive SUV sport utility vehicle with a 5.6 L liter 390 HP horse power V/8 engine with a 7 speed automatic transmission. Features include snow, rain and mud traction control, and 2 wheel drive, 4 wheel automatic drive, and 4 wheel drive lock modes for the transfer case. With the optional 275/50R 22″ all season tires this SUV can literally go anywhere you want it to go. Camping, skiing, off road trail blazing, or just on a weekend road trip, the Armada will take you there in style, comfort and safety.
The 2020 Armada is available in a choice of four model levels, SV, SL, Platinum and Platinum Reserve and in 4×2, or 4×4 WD wheel drive configurations. Just to be clear, this SUV is way too big to take on the Rubicon Trail, but it will look great parked at your country club, lake house, or at Costco. Large 3 row SUV’s are more about leather seating, entertainment systems, safety and electronic security systems, power accessories and multiple zone climate controls, then being taken off paved roads and getting dirty.
Among the many advanced technology systems available for 2020 is the standard I-RVM Intelligent Rear View Mirror which uses a high resolution camera mounted on the rear of the vehicle to project a clear image onto an LCD liquid crystal display monitor built into the standard rear view mirror. A switch located at the bottom of the mirror allows the driver to access either the traditional rear view mirror system, or the I-RVM Intelligent Rear View Mirror.
Armada’s extensive suite of available advanced safety and convenience systems includes Intelligent Distance Control I-DC, Automatic Emergency Braking AEB, Lane Departure Warning / Intelligent Lane Intervention LDW / I-LI, Blind Spot Warning BSW, Intelligent Back-up Intervention I-BI, Remote Engine Start System, Family Entertainment System and the Intelligent Around View Monitor I-AVM in the dashboard center stack screen display.
The Nissan Armada Platinum Reserve Edition has every option, power accessory and safety feature available on any large sized SUV for sale today. Plus Bluetooth, Hands Free Text Messaging, Sirius XM Radio with Traffic and Travel Alerts with three year complimentary access, plus a multitude of electronic assist systems to avoid collisions, every power comfort accessory, including a power tailgate and moonroof, and then add in chrome side cabin step bars, three 12 volt power outlets, 5 USB ports, two rear seat 8″ color touch screens with wireless headphone and remote controls, plus a 13 speaker Bose Premium audio system, and the list still goes on and on and on.
This top of the line 2020 Nissan Armada Platinum Reserve 4WD Edition SUV, with a list price of $71,730, will actually cost you thousands and thousands of dollars less then buying the same model luxury liner from all of the competition. And maybe, just for those reasons alone, you should “Drive one, Buy one, Today ©”.
This Bottom Line Review is provided by: Tony Leopardo © AutoWire.Net.
“Tony the Car Guy” is an automotive writer, editor and publisher in the San Francisco Bay Area. If you have a question, or comment for Tony, send it to tonyleo@pacbell.net or visit AutoWire.Net at www.autowire.net
