SR Construction is pleased to announce it has achieved platinum in the Associated Builders and Contractor’s STEP safety management system. Founded in 1989, STEP participation demonstrates safety leadership and a cultural commitment to safety performance.
STEP applicants measure their safety processes and policies on 24 key components through a detailed questionnaire with the goal of implementing or enhancing safety programs that reduce jobsite incidents. Committed to fostering an injury free workplace, SR maintains the organizational structures, safety and health management systems and procedures, and training plans that support this initiative while ensuring compliance with all relevant laws, regulations and standards.
“At SR Construction, safety is personal to each of us,” said Raymond Mondragon, safety director at SR Construction. “Each member of our team, from the leadership level to those on the project work sites, promotes and encourages an injury free workplace, knowing that all injuries are preventable when safety is the top priority.”
With safety at top of mind, SR Construction strives to equip each staff member with the knowledge and tools necessary to ensure a safe work environment. In the past five years, SR Construction has been the recipient of eight safety awards, a testament to their safety program.
“As an industry, it is our responsibility to ensure our workers go home in the same –or better—condition than when they arrived on the jobsite every day,” said Greg Sizemore, ABC vice president of health, safety, environment and workforce development. “By participating in STEP, SR Construction leadership has demonstrated a commitment to create the conditions for all to do their work without incident. By implementing proactive safety measures, such as toolbox talks and sound substance abuse policies, SR Construction is committed to consistently raising the bar when it comes to safety performance.”
According to ABC’s annual Safety Performance Report, applying STEP processes dramatically improves safety performance among participants regardless of company size or type of work, and can reduce recordable incidents up to 85%, making the best performing companies 680% safer than the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics industry average.
To learn more about the STEP program, visit abcstep.org.
