Over the past 30 years, the Explorer has led an interesting life. It was the first four-door sport-ute built by Ford, a replacement for the Bronco II, and became a huge seller in what was then still a nascent SUV segment. It was also involved in one of the biggest safety controversies — involving Firestone tires — during the early 2000s, and spawned the Sport Trac pickup variant. It’s been rebadged as a Mazda and a Mercury. With the fifth-generation model, it became a cop car. And that’s just covering the basics.
This brings us to the new, sixth-generation, 2020 model. Ford says the new Explorer is redesigned from the ground up with “a sportier, more athletic design, improved on- and off-road capability, and 600 pounds (272 kilograms) more in maximum towing capacity when properly equipped,” all thanks to its new (actually a return to) rear-wheel-drive architecture.
Still slotted size-wise between the Edge and the Expedition , the new Explorer remains a key player in the company’s SUV lineup, a kind of full-size “everyman” depending on the trim level, which starts off with the XLT and moves up through the Limited, Limited Hybrid, and sporty ST , before topping off with the Platinum. And, in testing the maxed out Platinum — with an exceedingly ambitious as-tested price just under $67,000 — I get to figure out if this three-row, seven-seat sport-ute can hang not only with the newest crop of family-focused rigs such as the Hyundai Palisade , Kia Telluride, Subaru Ascent, and VW Atlas, as well as the traditional rivals like the Dodge Durango, Honda Pilot, Jeep Grand Cherokee, Toyota Highlander, but also has the content and features to go up against more luxury-oriented nameplates.
Certainly, the power is there. Other than the Hybrid, the lower trim levels get a 2.3-litre four-cylinder EcoBoost engine to work with, while the Platinum and sportier ST benefit from a strong, twin-turbo 3.0L EcoBoost V6. Rated at 365 horsepwer (400 for the ST) when running on 93 octane, not to mention 380-pound-feet of torque, the engine has the goods to easily move the big SUV (more than five metres in length, and tipping the scales at a solid 2,144 kilograms) to highway speeds without running out of urge or breath.
As for fuel economy, however, the 14.5 L/100 kilometres I averaged during my week with the tester — an approximate 65/35 mix of highway and around-town driving — will prove painful at the pumps if one expects to make use of all the engine’s zip. To be fair, the V6 will run on lower-octane gas, just with reduced power. Whether the four- or six-cylinder, all power is routed through a smooth 10-speed automatic.
Furthermore, the engines can be tailored depending on driver’s whim or road/weather conditions via seven selectable drive modes. As all Explorer destined for the Canadian market comes standard with 4WD, these drive modes include normal, sport, trail, slippery, tow/haul, eco, deep snow and sand. Clearly, it’s Ford’s intention that the Explorer is more than just providing transport for the junior soccer team; that it’s for “doing things,” driving places and hauling/towing the necessary accouterments required for adventuring.
Ah yes, towing. The new Explorer’s rear-wheel-drive architecture also enables more towing capability when properly equipped. Explorers with the V6 can tow up to 5,600 pounds (2,540 kilograms), a 12 per cent increase over the outgoing models with the 3.5L EcoBoost V6.
Hauling boats and trailers was certainly on the minds of the Explorer design team, but the principle priority was carrying passengers and their stuff. The Platinum comes with standard power-folding third-row seats and second-row seats that can easily fold — and when stowed, create a flat-floor cargo area that offers 2,486 litres (87.8 cubic feet) of cargo space. As for accommodating families of varying sizes, the second-row seats feature a new mechanism that allows for easy entrance and exit to the third row using just one hand, while redesigned anchor points allow child seat installation anywhere in the second and third rows. As for actual roominess, the front and second-row seats offer plenty of legroom and headroom for six-footers, but the third row is definitely intended for a younger — as in, pre-teen — clientele.
