I held Sylvania Platinum (LON:SLP) but sold out today and yesterday. Why?
Low valuation high margin is often not a good wear for deep cyclicals....SLP may not have a straight economic cycle but it has acute cycles driven by end market fluctuations, but...
...its a growth market and not simple commodity you might say. Recent history and pricing says yes to that of course...but there are ongoing globally disruptive events (coronavirus which was preceded by a meaningful economic slowdown too). There are many examples of acute demand-supply imbalances in niche commodities. The dynamic always looks unassailably good. Anyway, I was happy to have the momentum behind the underlying commodities and cheap valuation as things looked good but the unfolding global dynamic provides challenge.
On top of that there are issues around supply. Admittedly they got stockpile so not heart attack risk but a change to dynamics of chrome producers they piggyback on for plant feed could lead to negative expectations being built in and a visible end of life of mine sort of valuation dynamic.
What about the cash hoard that SLP has?...very good point....but you can be guaranteed management will not deploy that meaningfully until its clear whether TSIHTF or not....that's best case 2 months (assuming phenomenal China snapback and RoW containing quite successfully and with low stress)...and then mgt will take a few more months just to be sure all okay.
Whilst I'm quite positive relative to consensus quite broad based Africa risk, I'm specifically negative SA -> worried tipped to negative around coronavirus. SA has ongoing political, economic and social fragility. It doesn't need more problems. On top of that it has a more aged and less healthy (in terms of chronic illnesses) population than many others bits of Africa. It is more prone to a coronavirus epldemic.
On a balance of risk perspective I'd rather own other things for upside from here rather than cheap commod company supplying a very richly priced niche.  Supply-demand gets very edgy in these situations potentially and the customer behaviour (car manufacturers) can quite easily switch from anxious knee jerk hoarding to a bit of wait and see on the price (with some stores of commodity coming onto market too now that the price is falling rather than rising)
Overall, my feel is that from a portfolio perspective SLP correlated too acutely to the downside risks that could  effect many other parts of market. Obvs the cash buffer limits it compared to many others....and I'll be interested again on significant downside volatility perhaps....but my feeling we are having as much of a correction of growth expectations (particularly in US where they were high) as  virus panic (virus just let it out the bag) so the opp may be to pick up high growth at a cheap price
When I read the Strong Buy recommendation in the Investors Chronicle, I decided to do some research. My conclusions are somewhat different, and I would not buy this stock. There were three issues for me:
- Sustainability of current high commodity prices for palladium and rhodium. Sylvania is a low volume producer. The big suppliers appear to be Norilsk Nickel, Anglo Platinum, Sibanye-Stillwater and Impala. If they were to ramp up production of PGM metals, this would mean higher supply volumes and potentially lower prices. In other words, the current windfall profits might evaporate.
- Mine lives. According to the company's London Investor Presentation, the company's resources have a profitable operational life of at least 10 years. So one can expect that over the next 10 years one or more of their operating complexes will have to be shut down. A case in point is their Steelpoort SDO which was decommissioned in 2017. In a worst case scenario, by 2030 all of these operations will have ceased for a variety of reasons.
- Capacity constraints. Also in their presentation they say that their current annual production capacity is 78k oz max. The Production Profile graph shows that production has effectively plateaued from 2017 onwards.
Taking all the above into account, I did the following maths. Assuming a current share price of 50p, the company is valued at say £150m. In return for this, you get:
(1) the current equity. At 31 December 2019 this was US$148m or £115m, assuming US$1.28 to £1; and
(2) the value of future earnings. This is the big unknown. For example, if you assume that the company will continue to produce 78k oz for 10 years at a gross basket price of US$1,300 per oz, then this equates to around US$17m net income p.a. (see 30 June 2019 financials). So over 10 years, this is US$170m or £133m.
Obviously if you assume that the higher basket price for PGM metals is sustainable (which I don't), then the rate of return will increase. If earnings were to increase to US$40m p.a., then this gives total equity of £428m at the end of the 10 year period. This is a rate of return of 11%.
Now considering all the risks that have been highlighted - labour unrest, power outages, lack of rainfall, drop in PGM market prices, GBP/USD/ZAR exchange rate movements etc - I personally would want to see a much higher return on my investment than the 11% in the most optimistic scenario.
One of the reasons companies have high P/E ratios is the belief that management will be able to grow revenues and profits by developing new products, finding new markets or increasing production through new manufacturing plants. I can't see that any of this applies to Sylvania.
