Shares in Sylvania Platinum ( LON:SLP ) are currently trading close to a 52 week high, with the share price up by around 10.9% to 35.23p over the past week. On a one-month basis, the Sylvania Platinum price has risen by 19.2%.
For investors holding the stock (or considering buying it), the question is: what now?
52 week highs are a popular market indicator. But research shows investors can be left wondering whether to sell the stock and take a profit or buy more and ride the uptrend. With this in mind, here’s a primer on what you should know about stocks hitting ‘new highs’...
What happens when a share hits a new high?
52 week highs are always good news. But surprisingly, the prices of high performing shares can be slow to move when they publish positive earnings news.
Research shows this happens because investors are cautious about bidding high performing shares any higher (even if they deserve it). Psychologists call this anchoring. As humans, we tend to take our time when it comes to changing our opinions in the face of new information - even when it's good news.
This emotional tug-of-war often ends with the ‘new high’ stock drifting higher in price over the coming weeks and months. The upward trend is called “post earnings announcement drift”. As the news sinks in, momentum takes over and the price moves higher.
A look at Sylvania Platinum’s StockReport could offer more insight into what’s driving the momentum in its share price - and whether that might continue.
With Sylvania Platinum trading close to its 52 week high, it’s possible that investors in the market are uncertain about whether to buy, hold or sell it. This uncertainty can cause erratic pricing in the short-term before momentum takes over - and it’s worth considering this before making your own trading decision.
To find more stocks that are trading close to their 52 week highs, you can explore this constantly updated 52 Week Highs screen , which covers all the ‘new highs’ in the market.
As per our Terms of Use, Stockopedia is a financial news & data site, discussion forum and content aggregator. Our site should be used for educational & informational purposes only. We do not provide investment advice, recommendations or views as to whether an investment or strategy is suited to the investment needs of a specific individual. You should make your own decisions and seek independent professional advice before doing so. Remember: Shares can go down as well as up. Past performance is not a guide to future performance & investors may not get back the amount invested.
