I'm by no means an expert, but I read this...
'A company issues a share only once; after that, investors may sell it to another investor. When companies buy back their own shares, the shares remain listed as issued, even though they become classified as "treasury shares," because the company may resell them.'
Here are link descriptions/definitions to Issued Shares & Outstanding Shares if helpful.
Great in-depth follow-up to your March Sylvania Platinum (LON:SLP) analysis Jack. A lot of work there thank you. I'm really interested in this one and I appreciate the past is not the future, but nevertheless it does intrigue me...
So as far as I can see it all started at about 30p back in July 2006, peaked at all time highs of ≈ 115p a year later lasting roughly 1.5-years until the 'Great Recession' plummeting to 20p, bounced back to ≈ 55p about a year later keeping somewhat steady for 2-years, then dropping and mellowing to ≈ 10p for 6-years until it's ascent around 2018, glitching COVID-19 and now recovering.
Things presumably came to fruition the year after in 2007 and possibly at their best peak production with the demand and pricing to match — times were good on the market. They never really recovered after the GR eventually riding off into the sunset until later volume activity started to increase around mid 2016 with a 66m spike to rise again. Maybe someone knew something and woke the herd or was just coincidence.
Things certainly look rosy now though not without risks, but I'm curious on thoughts of what the dynamics were like for them back in their heyday, why the declining long pause and how that compares to now?
I hold Sylvania Platinum and certainly think that it represents one of the more compelling examples of value currently on offer.   Deducting reported cash from the market cap suggests a PE of circa 2.9.   Because the Sylvania Platinum (LON:SLP) forecast earnings for 2021 are slightly below 2020's it no longer qualifies for a PEG.   However I think that forecasts for 2021 given current circumstances are fairly speculative and therefore shouldn't I believe be treated as more than a rough estimate.
The supply and demand dynamics for SLP certainly look good with the requirements of Rhodium and Palladium for electric and petrol vehicles.   I think the case is less clear in respect of Platinum however I think that its wider use in respect of jewellery, dentistry, plastics, fertilizers and medical equipment should be given a boost as economies begin to reopen.   Platinum is also at a relatively low price level historically and I think may have some upside in the near future.
On the debit side I am concerned about the rate of Covid 19 in South Africa which I think is the highest in Africa.   Nevertheless the problem appears to be fairly minor compared to that in the UK and Western Europe.
Many thanks if I have it right then thy are never effectively cancelled just stored in a warehouse almost to be called upon later if needed.
Correct. In his book Trade Like a Stock Market Wizard. Minervini regards a low PE usually as a sign of a declining company and a high PE usually as a sign of a growing company.
Quote: "The top 25 performing stocks (in the US) from 1995 to 2005 had an average PE ratio of 33x, ranging from a low of 8.6x to a high of 223x."
It's worth noting that Tesla currently has a PE of 134 and the share price has quadrupled in the last year from $250 to $1000.
Minervini also sees the 'superlow' PE as a red flag. The PE is low for a reason. It certainly does not represent a bargain, at least not for the growth investor.
I note that the price of Sylvania Platinum (LON:SLP) has just gone below the 200MA on increased selling volumes. The only recent news is that there has been a share buyback on 1st July. This is the first time (apart from during the crash in February / March) that the price has fallen below the 200 MA in the last two years. I've decided to sell and wait for a sign of recovery before buying back. Does anyone know why the share price has fallen so abruptly?
