The Northam Platinum (JSE:NHM) Share Price Has Gained 238%, So Why Not Pay It Some Attention?
Simply Wall St January 24, 2020
When you buy a stock there is always a possibility that it could drop 100%. But on the bright side, if you buy shares in a high quality company at the right price, you can gain well over 100%. For instance, the price of Northam Platinum Limited ( JSE:NHM ) stock is up an impressive 238% over the last five years. Also pleasing for shareholders was the 34% gain in the last three months.
Given that Northam Platinum only made minimal earnings in the last twelve months, we’ll focus on revenue to gauge its business development. Generally speaking, we’d consider a stock like this alongside loss-making companies, simply because the quantum of the profit is so low. It would be hard to believe in a more profitable future without growing revenues.
For the last half decade, Northam Platinum can boast revenue growth at a rate of 11% per year. That’s a pretty good long term growth rate. Broadly speaking, this solid progress may well be reflected by the healthy share price gain of 28% per year over five years. It’s well worth monitoring the growth trend in revenue, because if growth accelerates, that might signal an opportunity. Accelerating growth can be a sign of an inflection point – and could indicate profits lie ahead. Worth watching 100%
We know that Northam Platinum has improved its bottom line lately, but what does the future have in store? This free report showing analyst forecasts should help you form a view on Northam Platinum
It’s nice to see that Northam Platinum shareholders have received a total shareholder return of 180% over the last year. That gain is better than the annual TSR over five years, which is 28%. Therefore it seems like sentiment around the company has been positive lately. Someone with an optimistic perspective could view the recent improvement in TSR as indicating that the business itself is getting better with time. While it is well worth considering the different impacts that market conditions can have on the share price, there are other factors that are even more important. For example, we’ve discovered 2 warning signs for Northam Platinum (1 doesn’t sit too well with us!) that you should be aware of before investing here.
But note: Northam Platinum may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with past earnings growth (and further growth forecast).
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on ZA exchanges.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
