The long term potential for Platinum , in conjunction with the advance in Rhodium, Palladium , Gold , and Silver , is a new Bullish Price Trend.
Our researchers believe Platinum must move above $1200 for this new Bullish trend to anchor a “Breakout Base” formation.  The current investment environment suggests a new metals rally is setting up.
Fear is starting to take hold of the markets and industrial and manufacturing demands are still driving prices and supply demands higher and higher.  As investors pile into the metals as a form of safety, we expect Platinum to rally above $1200 within the next 4 to 6+ months and begin a much broader rally to levels above $1600 overtime.
Demand for Platinum has increased because of two main reasons:
2) Increase in acceptance of fuel cells.
As we learn more about the industrial and manufacturing demands for Platinum. It becomes evident that a new upside bias in trend may just be getting started.
Traders need to understand and consider the opportunities presented by this incredible longer-term setup in Platinum.   Could platinum DOUBLE in price within 12 months?  Could it TRIPLE?
Follow our research to stay ahead of this incredible opportunity for skilled technical traders and learn how we can help you find great trades.
As a technical analysis and trader since 1997 I have been through a few bull/bear market cycles, I have a good pulse on the market and timing key turning points for both short-term swing trading and long-term investment capital. The opportunities are massive/life-changing if handled properly.
Join my Wealth Building Newsletter if you like what you read here and ride my coattails as I navigate these financial markets and build wealth while others lose nearly everything they own.
NOTICE: Our free research does not constitute a trade recommendation or solicitation for our readers to take any action regarding this research.  It is provided for educational purposes only.  Our research team produces these research articles to share information with our followers/readers in an effort to try to keep you well informed.  Visit our web site to learn how to take advantage of our members-only research and trading signals.
