LOS ANGELES, Feb. 9, 2020 /PRNewswire/ -- Awards show season culminated with the 92nd Annual Academy Awards, where the world's most famous celebrities walked the red carpet in exquisite platinum jewelry designs.
Platinum, the naturally white setting that truly enhances the brilliance of diamonds and colored gemstones, perfectly complemented the couture gowns, glamorous hairstyles and makeup.
According to celebrity stylist Micaela Erlanger who selected platinum jewelry for Presenter Sigourney Weaver, "For a night as glamorous as the Oscars, I chose brilliant jewelry with megawatt sparkle. Sigourney Weaver's earrings set in platinum added extra shine making the star stand out on the red carpet, similar to Gal Gadot, Charlize Theron and Greta Gerwig in platinum necklaces!"
Platinum Guild International is pleased to share that leading red carpet jewelry brands such as Kwiat, Fred Leighton, Tiffany & Co., Bvlgari, and Harry Winston chose to style A-list celebrities in naturally white platinum. Platinum jewelry is the choice accessory for celebrities to capture the most special, glamorous and memorable moments.
The following stars selected platinum jewelry to celebrate their achievements:
Sigourney Weaver in Kwiat and Fred Leighton, set in Platinum
Art Deco bracelet with emeralds and diamonds by Cartier, set in platinum
1930's Bombe shaped ring with diamonds by Rene Boivin, set in platinum
Charlize Theron in Platinum by Tiffany & Co.
Fleur de Lis key bar earrings with diamonds, set in platinum ($1,000)
Embrace® band ring with diamonds, set in platinum (priced at $16,000)
Gal Gadot Platinum by Tiffany & Co.
Ring with a rectangular modified brilliant diamond (over 9 carats) and other diamonds, set in platinum
1920's diamond and onyx dress set by Cartier, set in platinum
Antique Old European cut diamond twin ring, set in platinum
Earrings with emerald and baguette diamonds, set in platinum
Camila Morrone in Platinum by Tiffany & Co.
Asymmetrical Bow necklace with cultured diamonds, set in platinum
Art Deco pinky ring with diamonds (approximately 2 carats) and onyx by Fred Leighton, set in platinum
Stud earring with diamond by Kwiat, set in platinum
Platinum is the ideal choice for red carpet jewelry because it holds diamonds and precious gemstones more securely than any other metal. It is not only the highest quality metal, but its density makes it one of the most durable and enduring precious metals. Platinum is also naturally white, unlike white gold, which means it will not cast any tint onto a diamond or gemstone, allowing the stone's genuine color to sparkle brightly.
For more information, please visit Platinum Guild International USA's sites:
