You've probably heard of a catalytic converter — it's that thing in your car's exhaust pipe that transforms nasty, unburnt hydrocarbons into less toxic emissions.
But not many of us would know that the origins of our catalytic converters are bedded in one of the most violent chapters of Earth's history: when our young planet was under intense bombardment by huge asteroids.
Catalytic converters are made from platinum-group metals — the rarest metals on our planet, and they have an extra-terrestrial origin.
The platinum-group metals — platinum, palladium, rhodium, iridium, osmium, ruthenium and rhenium — are the seven rarest metals found on the surface of our planet.
Together, they make up about 0.0000002 per cent or 0.2 millionths of the Earth's crust.
Osmium is a super-rare member of the platinum-group metals.
These metals, which we'll call PGMs for short, are prized not just for their scarcity but because of their exceptional catalytic properties and their resistance to chemical corrosion and heat.
And their demand is expected to grow in the coming years with the rise of clean energy technologies and the growing need for things like desalination plants.
And what does that have to do with asteroids?
Around 4 billion years ago, Earth had recently formed a solid crust and some primitive oceans and was about 40 degrees Celsius hotter than today.
At the time, it was under cataclysmic bombardment from space rocks.
We aren't talking about a few falling stars, or even a couple of meteor showers, but a torrent of 50-kilometre-wide asteroids hitting our planet as often as once a century.
For reference, that's roughly the same size as the asteroid that wiped out the dinosaurs hitting the Earth about once per human lifetime.
Some of these asteroid impacts were so violent they could have vaporised the early seas back into the atmosphere.
And they continued to pummel the Earth for a few hundred million years, bringing with them a precious cargo: platinum-group metals.
If they were pummelling the Earth, where did all the PGMs go?
As you've probably noticed, the surface of our planet is not littered with 50km-wide asteroids.
About half a billion years later, after the meteorite bombardment had calmed down, Earth "hit puberty" with the onset of plate tectonics.
Plate tectonics are the huge slabs of Earth's crust that fit together like a jigsaw puzzle floating on the mantle.
Where those puzzle pieces collide, especially where one piece is denser than the other, the dense one is usually pushed down into the mantle.
Where they pull apart, molten lava forges its way to the surface, cools and forms new land.
Since the earliest formation of plate tectonics, the surface of our planet has been almost entirely recycled back into the mantle, taking the PGMs with it.
Once down there, the PGMs formed alloys with iron and nickel and rained down through the mantle to our dense core.
So how are there PGMs on the surface?
While there are still some PGMs down in our mantle, they have an extremely high melting point and need to be superheated to enter the magma and make their way to the surface.
In the past, this happened through magnesium-rich lavas called komatiites, which are known to have erupted at temperatures of more than 1,600C.
