©1996-2020 Ziff Davis, LLC. IGN® is among the federally registered trademarks of IGN Entertainment, Inc. and may only be used with explicit written permission.
How to get every last one of them.
This The Last of Us 2 Trophy Guide and List explains everything you need to do to get all 26 trophies and earn the platinum. This time around there are no difficulty based trophies but you will need to play at least some of the game twice in order to fully upgrade your character.
Every Last One of Them: Collect all trophies (platinum)
What I Had to Do: Complete the story
Specialist: Learn all player upgrades in one branch.
Put My Name Up: Get the high score in the bow and arrow game.
Sharp Shooter: win at the shooting range.
So Great and Small (Chapter 2: Seattle Day 1 - Downtown)
This artifact doubles as a trophy, and can be found in the bank’s vault. Enter the vault using the note found outside (the code is 60, 23, 06), and once inside, look in the back right corner behind a table full of money to find an open deposit box that has a small ring inside. This Uncharted Easter Egg will earn you the So Great and Small trophy.
Check out every location downtown to unlock this trophy. You can find them all with our Seattle Day 1 - Downtown Walkthrough .
Pick up the hat from the display when you enter the museum and pick up the hat. When you enter the first exhibit, put a hat on the dinosaur on the right. Take it off and put the hat on another Dinosaur. Then, approach Joel and interact with him to put the hat on his head. This unlocks the Looks Good On You trophy. Note: you may get this option after just one dinosaur. Check the Chapter 2 - The Birthday Gift walkthrough for more context and collectibles.
Win at the shooting range to unlock this trophy. Check out the full walkthrough for Chapter 6 - The Forward Base .
After picking up the Jasmine Bakery Safe note, head into the next room and immediately look to the right for a small desk with a fan, and you can find a strange golden egg just below it, near the boarded up door. This artifact doubles as a trophy! Check out the full walkthrough for Chapter 6 - Hostile Territory .
Interact with the toy bow by the chalkboard to try and get your name on the scoreboard. Hit at least 10 to unlock the Put My Name Up Trophy. Check out the full walkthrough for Chapter 6 Winter Visit.
You won't be able to fully upgrade your character and weapons the first time around so beat the game and unlock New Game Plus to continue building on your existing skills.
For even more TLOU 2 guides, check out IGN's The Last of Us 2 Guide hub or click through to one of the following pages:
