The Last of Us 2: How to Get the Platinum Trophy
It's possible to earn the Platinum in The Last of Us 2 within a single playthrough, although in all likelihood you'll need to use New Game + in order to grab the Survival Expert and Arms Master Trophies as there simply aren't enough Supplements and Spare Parts in a single playthrough to unlock all the Player Upgrades and Weapon Upgrades.
You'll also need to ensure that you craft every item (See Also: The Last of Us 2: How to Craft Every Item ) and that you visit every location in Downtown Seattle (See Also: The Last of Us 2: How to Visit Every Location in Downtown Seattle ). There are also some one-off gameplay challenges that you'll need to be aware of, and you can find more information on those with the following guides: The Last of Us 2: How to Put a Hat on Your Companion , The Last of Us 2: How to Win the Marksmanship Competition , The Last of Us 2: How to Earn the High Score in the Archery Game .
Have a read through the Trophy breakdown below to get a grasp of what you need to do in order to unlock the Platinum Trophy, and then use our The Last of Us 2 guide to ensure you 100 per cent the game and unlock all the Trophies. One thing to note is that there are no missable Trophies, so if you miss something you can go back and grab it in New Game + or Chapter Select. For more information, check out our guide: The Last of Us 2: Are There Any Missable Trophies?
The Last of Us 2: All Trophies
There are 26 Trophies to unlock in The Last of Us 2. Below you'll find a full list of all the game's Trophies, as well descriptions and strategies for how to obtain them.
To unlock The Last of Us 2's Platinum Trophy, you'll just need to grab the other 25 Trophies detailed below.
A fairly straight-forward Trophy: you simply need to complete the campaign. It doesn't matter which difficulty you select, so we recommend you refer to the following guide to find a setting that feels comfortable for you: The Last of Us 2: What Difficulty Should You Select?
To learn all Player Upgrades you'll need to first find all Training Manuals. You can find out how to do that through here: The Last of Us 2: How to Find All Training Manuals and Learn All Player Upgrades . Once you've got all the Training Manuals, simply spend your Supplements on the various Player Upgrades until you've unlocked them all. You'll need to have learned all Player Upgrades for both Ellie and Abby in order for the Trophy to pop.
You can upgrade weapons at the Workbenches you find around the world. For more information on that, refer to the following: The Last of Us 2: All Workbench Locations . Weapons are upgraded using Spare Parts, but you'll need to ensure you've discovered all firearms in the first place. You can find out more information on that through here: The Last of Us 2: All Weapon Locations and Upgrades . You'll need to have upgraded all Ellie and Abby's weapons in order to unlock the Trophy.
You just need to collect all Artefacts and Journal Entries for this Trophy to pop. For a full list of Artefacts, refer to the following guide: The Last of Us 2: All Artefacts Locations . You'll also need to ensure you collect all the Journal Entries, so refer to the following guide: The Last of Us 2: All Journal Entries .
Trading Cards represent Ellie's main collectible, and you'll need to snag them all for this Trophy to unlock. Refer to the following guide for more information: The Last of Us 2: All Trading Cards Locations .
Similarly to Trading Cards for Ellie, Coins represent Abby's main collectible type in The Last of Us 2. You'll need to grab all of them to unlock this Trophy. You can check out our guide for more information: The Last of Us 2: All Coins Locations .
You don't necessarily need to interact with a Workbench to "find" it, however we recommend using them when you encounter them in order to upgrade your firearms. You can find more information in the following guide: The Last of Us 2: All Workbench Locations .
You simply need to fully upgrade a single weapon in either Ellie or Abby's arsenal in order to unlock this Trophy. Refer to the Arms Master Trophy for more information.
You need to unlock all the Player Upgrades provided by one Training Manual in order to unlock this Trophy. Check out the Survival Expert Trophy for more information.
Over the course of the campaign, you'll discover Safes. You'll need to know the Safe Code Combination in order to unlock these. Fortunately, our guide can help: The Last of Us 2: All Safe Code Combinations . Open all the Safes in order to unlock this Trophy.
During the Downtown chapter of The Last of Us 2, you'll need to visit 10 different locations in order to unlock this Trophy. For more information, check out our guide: The Last of Us 2: How to Visit Every Location in Downtown Seattle .
Training Manuals enable you to unlock Player Upgrades by spending Supplements. Use the following guide to find them all: The Last of Us 2: How to Find All Training Manuals and Learn All Player Upgrades .
You'll unlock this while attempting to snag the Survival Expert Trophy, so refer to that for more information.
You'll need to find all of the weapons available to Ellie and Abby in order to unlock this Trophy. For more information on that, refer to our guide: The Last of Us 2: All Weapon Locations and Upgrades .
You'll unlock this while you attempt to complete the Prepared for the Worst Trophy, so refer to that for more information.
Crafting is a key part of The Last of Us 2's gameplay loop, but some items require you to purchase Player Upgrades using Training Manuals in order to add them to your inventory. You can find a full list of craftable items and the resources required through here: The Last of Us 2: How to Craft Every Item .
You'll unlock this as part of the Arms Master Trophy. You just need to go to a Workbench and spend your Spare Parts on one upgrade.
You'll unlock this as part of the Survival Expert Trophy. Simply use one of your Training Manuals to purchase a single upgrade with Supplements.
For more information, either refer to the Master Set Trophy or click through the following link: The Last of Us 2: All Trading Cards Locations .
For more information on this, check out the Numismatist Trophy, or go to the following page: The Last of Us 2: All Coins Locations .
You need to put a hat on Joel during The Birthday Gift chapter to unlock this Trophy. For a guide on how to unlock it, follow the link: The Last of Us 2: How to Put a Hat on Your Companion .
This Trophy occurs as part of The Stadium chapter. You need to win the shooting range contest with Manny in order to unlock it. You can find more information through here: The Last of Us 2: How to Win the Marksmanship Competition .
You'll unlock this Trophy in the Winter Visit chapter, by initiating the archery game setup by Owen and Mel. You can find a full guide through the following link: The Last of Us 2: How to Earn the High Score in the Archery Game .
You can find our guide to the Strange Artefact through the following link: The Last of Us 2: How to Find the Strange Artefact . This is one of The Last of Us 2's biggest Easter eggs, and you can find a full list of those through the following link: The Last of Us 2: All Easter Eggs .
The Engraved Ring is one of The Last of Us 2's main Easter eggs. You can find a list of all Easter eggs, through the following link: The Last of Us 2: All Easter Eggs . For a guide on where to find the Engraved Ring in the Downtown chapter, check out our guide: The Last of Us 2: How to Find the Engraved Ring .
Have you unlocked the Platinum Trophy in The Last of Us 2 yet? Let us know, and head back to our The Last of Us 2 guide for more information on the game.
