Thermal cameras with facial biometrics deployed by ZKTeco partner, launched by Platinum CCTV
Terra State Community College in Ohio is installing touchless multi-biometric devices with thermal and mask detection from ZKTeco to reduce the risk of COVID-19 transmission and secure access control.
Three SpeedFace+ devices have been acquired through ZKTeco partner Northcoast Security, and College staff will customize the software they use to build stations to operate automatic door opening and sound an alarm if an unmasked face or fever is detected. Terra State plans to use the devices to sign people in and out of facilities and enforce mask and fever rules for campus access.
SpeedFace+ provides facial, palm and fingerprint recognition, and ZKTeco added temperature screening capabilities in response to the pandemic.
ZKTeco moved its U.S. headquarters to Georgia from New Jersey in 2019 with a $5 million investment.
Platinum CCTV has released body temperature and mask detection thermal cameras with access control capabilities and biometric facial recognition for small and medium-sized businesses to scan employees and customers, the company announced.
The PT-AS7213X-T1 Thermal IP camera is equipped with a thermal imaging system that detects body temperature to within 0.5 degrees Celsius, but it also detects if people are wearing a mask. Built on an access control platform, it leverages a mix of fever detection, mask detection, facial recognition and smart cards to allow or prevent facility access.
“We are really excited with the launch of this new thermal fever camera,” said Michael Dunteman, CEO of Platinum CCTV, in a prepared statement. “It fits into the budget of small businesses, which has been one of our goals as the country began to reopen. Preventing entry of customers and employees with a fever or without a mask helps keep everyone safer. This camera facilitates that process automatically for small businesses everywhere, making it easier for people to return to work.  We are proud to have begun installing these cameras in small businesses like salons and day spas, who are beginning open across the country.”
The camera works with common electronic door locks and can be configured to each company’s needs. It can be used by itself or integrated with Platinum CCTV’s proprietary AVM (Advanced Video Management) platform for recording. The thermal fever camera includes biometric facial recognition and temperature in 0.2 seconds, optional facial recognition with up to 100,000 face memory, compatibility with most NVR software, and temperature measurement from 1 to 6 feet away, among others. It can be installed in a number of environments including healthcare organizations, the hospitality industry, retail, manufacturing and residential buildings.
