Todd 'Bubba' Horwitz Thursday May 28, 2020 07:45
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Gold has  become like a weather report – unpredictable and the timing is almost  impossible. The last few weeks have been very stormy for gold. Although the  long-term trend remains up, the short-term action has been negative. The  pattern itself has been like a thunderstorm; all looks good and clear, bang, in  comes the seller or thunderstorm and down it goes.
Gold has been  in a wide consolidation pattern with about an $80 range. Volume has been fair  and liquidity noticeably light. As of this morning, gold is at a decision  point. Either the bull market continues, or the sellers will take over. For  now, we remain long but know the storm could come and reverse the pattern. We  will hold but will not add at these levels.
Silver and platinum have been bullish and moving higher. The last couple of days have been  a little stormy in platinum and silver with the pressure starting to mount. The  threat of a reversal in platinum and silver is real but they are both stronger  than gold. We are long all three and will stay there at least until tomorrow;  if the selling picks up, it will probably create a reversal signal. We will  watch the price action before making a rash decision. In the meantime, we will  be carrying our umbrella.
We are now  offering a comprehensive commodity report that complements our other services.  The Technomental Commodity Report comes out on Wednesday evenings and provides  comprehensive fundamental and technical coverage of most commodities that trade  on the futures markets in the U.S. and U.K., as well as stocks, bonds and  digital currencies. There is a summary report on Friday after the markets  close, and robust quarterly reports on each of the six commodity sectors and a  general overview that recaps the past three months and offers projections and suggestions  for the next quarter. Andy Hecht, the author of the report, has been a  commodity trader since the early 1980s and has vast experience in markets  across all asset classes. Sign up here: Bubba Trading  Technomental Report
