Autoweek may earn money from the links on this page.
Economic impact of coronavirus leads to cutbacks at Porsche, possible loss of driving opportunities.
By any measure, these four guys are pretty good race car drivers. And by “pretty good,” we mean among the best in the world.
Nick Tandy, for instance, was first in class at the Rolex 24 at Daytona, has two class wins at the Mobil 1 Twelve Hours of Sebring and won the 24 Hours of Le Mans.
Earl Bamber has two overall wins at the 24 Hours of Le Mans. He and his teammate, Laurens Vanthoor, had seven podiums in 11 IMSA WeatherTech SportsCar Championship races in 2019, as well as three class wins, and won the season championship in GT Le Mans.
Speaking of Vanthoor, he has a GTE Pro class win at the 24 Hours of Le Mans. He and Bamber were also second in the GT Le Mans class at the 2020 Rolex 24 at Daytona, driving a brand-new car. He also has a victory at the tough 24 Hours of Nürburgring.
And Frédéric Makowiecki has three second-place finishes and a third in class at the 24 Hours of Le Mans. And like Vanthoor, he has a win in the 24 Hours of Nürburgring.
What do they have in common? They are Porsche factory “works” drivers, and they compete in the GT Le Mans class in the IMSA WeatherTech SportsCar Championship. Last season the two Porsche teams were first and second in the driver standings.
And something else in common: The four will be out of work at the end of the 2020 IMSA season, since Porsche, citing cutbacks due to the economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic, will no longer fund the two-car IMSA GTLM effort.
And in a video press conference on Monday, the four drivers did not sound particularly optimistic about their future. “It’s very sad that this will be our last season in IMSA with this current project,” said Tandy. “What’s ahead for the future is a big unknown, but it’s the same for a lot of people in the world, including the manufacturers. At the moment, we currently don’t have much to look forward to in the future.
“Life is changing so much,” Tandy told Autoweek . “Motorsports will still be around, but we just need to see to what degree in the next few years.”
The four FIA Platinum-rated Porsche GT Le Mans drivers are certainly happy that, after a layoff that began with the checkered flag at the Rolex 24 at Daytona back in January, the series is starting back up this Saturday at Daytona International Speedway with the WeatherTech 240. That’s “240” as in two hours and 40 minutes, the normal length of most IMSA WeatherTech races. It will be broadcast live on NBCSN, the NBC Sports App and TrackPass on NBC beginning at 6 p.m. ET. IMSA Radio also will have live radio coverage throughout the weekend on IMSARadio.com, in addition to Sirius Channel 216, XM 210 and Internet 970.
Daytona is letting 5,000 fans into the stands—which can hold nearly 100,000—and a computer program is spacing out the seating in advance. Tickets, for Florida residents only, are $30, with those under 12 free. At this writing, tickets are still available. A limited number of fans will also be allowed into Sebring International Raceway two weeks from Saturday for the third IMSA WeatherTech event, where the Michelin Pilot Challenge series will restart its season.
As for Porsche, the brand will certainly still be represented in IMSA’s GT Daytona class, where—unlike GT Le Mans—full factory support is not allowed. There will be Porsche 911 GT3Rs in GT Daytona and other Porsches in Michelin Pilot Challenge.
But the attraction of GT Le Mans is that it truly pits manufacturer against manufacturer, and allows an all-Platinum-rated driver lineup, where GT Daytona requires a mix of drivers with various skill levels. When Ford dropped its support of the Ganassi Racing Ford GT team at the end of 2019, it diluted the field, and with Porsche gone next year, we are likely looking at a full-season class of four cars for 2021—two of the new Chevrolet Corvette Racing C8.Rs and two 3-year-old Team RLL BMW M8 GTEs, though BMW has yet to announce whether it will return in 2021. We could also see, as we have in the past, guest appearances by the Risi Ferrari 488 GTE.
But the field will be missing the four Porsche drivers, who are wondering what will happen. Vanthoor was more positive that Tandy, but not by much: “We’re all wondering, what are we doing next year? What program? At this point in time it is difficult for anyone at Porsche to say how this is all going to turn out. Porsche is one of the most secure places in the motorsport industry to be at, so we are sure something will be worked out.
“But it isn’t just us with a question mark over us,” Vanthoor said. “Everybody on the whole planet has some sort of question mark. The world has a question mark over it.”
Selected before the pandemic, Porsche named its works drivers late in 2019 for 2020. There are 18 of them on the payroll, plus two up-and-coming “Porsche Young Professionals” and two “Porsche Juniors.” For 2020—at least, this was the pre-pandemic plan—Porsche would field a team in Formula E, two cars in the FIA World Endurance Championship, two in the IMSA WeatherTech series and six drivers racing in the Intercontinental GT Challenge.
As Vanthoor said, being formally attached to Porsche is one of the best gigs in motorsports. Two veterans, Jörg Bergmeister and Timo Bernhard, are the longest-tenured Porsche works drivers, having signed on 20 years ago. The lone American works driver, Patrick Long, has been with Porsche since 2003. He’s teamed with Ryan Hardwick in the Wright Motorsports Porsche 911 GT3R in the GT Daytona class—it’s the only Porsche in GTD this Saturday. Hardwick, a Bronze-rated gentleman racer, is senior vice president of World Choice Investments.
Frankly, it will be surprising if Porsche sends the four IMSA GTLM drivers to the unemployment office, particularly if the manufacturer pulls the trigger on the new LMDh Prototype that will be the featured class in both IMSA and the World Endurance Championship, meaning U.S teams can race with the WEC—including the 24 Hours of Le Mans—and WEC teams can come race at Daytona and Sebring, without having to alter the car. Porsche has said it is working on a prototype of the Prototype, due in IMSA in 2022, but that will likely be delayed by the pandemic.
Tandy, for one, would love to have a shot at a Porsche-powered LMDh. “All of us love driving great cars whether they are GT or Prototype, as long as they are built and run by great teams. So yes, definitely, we’d all be interested in that. I hope the LMDh takes off in the future, but we simply don’t know what to expect. Life is changing so much.”
This content is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page to help users provide their email addresses. You may be able to find more information about this and similar content at piano.io
This commenting section is created and maintained by a third party, and imported onto this page. You may be able to find more information on their web site.
