Trade Alert: The CEO & Executive Director Of Anglo American Platinum Limited (JSE:AMS), Christopher Griffith, Has Just Spent R11m Buying Shares
Simply Wall St March 5, 2020
Anglo American Platinum Limited ( JSE:AMS ) shareholders (or potential shareholders) will be happy to see that the CEO & Executive Director, Christopher Griffith, recently bought a whopping R11m worth of stock, at a price of R1,335. Aside from being a solid chunk in its own right, the deft move also saw their holding increase by some 30%.
In fact, the recent purchase by CEO & Executive Director Christopher Griffith was not their only trade of Anglo American Platinum shares this year. Earlier in the year, they sold shares at a price ofR768 per share in a -R20.6m transaction. That means that an insider was selling shares at slightly below the current price (R1,161). We generally consider it a negative if insiders have been selling, especially if they did so below the current price, because it implies that they considered a lower price to be reasonable. However, while insider selling is sometimes discouraging, it’s only a weak signal. We note that the biggest single sale was 100% of Christopher Griffith’s holding.
Christopher Griffith bought 22.30k shares over the last 12 months at an average price of R968. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
There are plenty of other companies that have insiders buying up shares. You probably do not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
I like to look at how many shares insiders own in a company, to help inform my view of how aligned they are with insiders. A high insider ownership often makes company leadership more mindful of shareholder interests. Based on our data, Anglo American Platinum insiders have about 0.01% of the stock, worth approximately R41m. I generally like to see higher levels of ownership.
So What Do The Anglo American Platinum Insider Transactions Indicate?
It is good to see the recent insider purchase. And the longer term insider transactions also give us confidence. Insiders likely see value in Anglo American Platinum shares, given these transactions (along with notable insider ownership of the company). Therefore, you should definitely take a look at this FREE report showing analyst forecasts for Anglo American Platinum .
But note: Anglo American Platinum may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
