The University of Western Australia has received top honours at the 2020 Australian LGBTQ Inclusion Awards.
UWA was awarded Platinum status in recognition of its long-term Gold Employer status at this year’s online event.
UWA shares this top-tier position with the Commonwealth Bank of Australia and PwC Australia.
Some of the University’s key achievements include establishing Australia’s first university network for bisexual staff, students, and alumni; implementing the first study of the LGBTIQA+ student experience at an Australian university; and developing a transgender policy to protect the rights of staff and students.
The 2020 Australian LGBTQ Inclusion Awards is Australia’s leading annual celebration of LGBTQ workplace inclusion.
The AWEI and HWEI are rigorous and evidence-based benchmarking tools that annually assess workplaces in the progress and impact of LGBTQ inclusion initiatives.
The awards are hosted by ACON’s Pride Inclusion Programs, the national not-for-profit LGBTQ inclusion support program for employers, sporting organisations and service providers.
UWA Vice-Chancellor Professor Jane den Hollander AO said it was an honour to be identified as an employer of choice for diversity and inclusion.
“To be recognised as a Gold Employer is an encouraging testament to the ongoing work of the UWA community in developing an inclusive campus where everyone can grow and succeed, ” Professor Den Hollander said.
“At UWA, we promote an environment that welcomes, accepts and embraces the diversity of our staff and students.”
Help us keep up the good work Why?
Well, unlike many news organisations, we have no sponsors, no corporate or ideological interests. We don't put up a paywall – we believe in free access to information of public interest.
Media ownership in Australia is one of the most concentrated in the world ( Learn more ). Since the trend of consolidation is and has historically been upward, fewer and fewer individuals or organizations control increasing shares of the mass media in our country. According to independent assessment, about 98% of the media sector is held by three conglomerates. This tendency is not only totally unacceptable, but also to a degree frightening). Learn more here
We endeavour to provide the community with real-time access to true unfiltered news firsthand from primary sources. 
It is a bumpy road with all sorties of difficulties.
We can only achieve this goal together. Our website is open to any citizen journalists and organizations who want to contribute, publish high-quality insights or send media releases to improve public access to impartial information. You and we have the right to know, learn, read, hear what and how we deem appropriate.
Your support is greatly appreciated.
All donations are kept completely private and confidential.
