With spring just around the corner, it was time for a dramatic hair makeover.
It may not seem like it, given the current frigid temperatures outside, but spring is less than three weeks away. What better time to undergo a hair makeover than the season of rebirth and renewal? Zero Coveteur staffers (this editor included) were willing to attempt anything drastic, so we enlisted reader and friend Liz to do so. Her very specific request? Transform her virgin brunette stands into a silvery platinum grey—silver-unicorn-meets-ice-queen status.
A dye job like this isn’t as simple as adding a few highlights or balayage . On the contrary, this was a multi-hour process to ensure that Liz’s hair remained healthy and that the color turned out exactly as she envisioned—not quite salt-and-pepper grey and not quite platinum, but a happy silver medium between the two.
Cue our arrival at the IGK salon in SoHo, Manhattan, where master colorist Stephanie Brown assured us that Liz would resemble an ice queen in just a few hours’ time. “I compare doing a double process to watching a toddler—you can’t really take your eyes off of it,” says Brown, “otherwise things can go drastically wrong. So when bleaching virgin hair—meaning not color-treated—from brunette to silver, I first sprayed it with IGK Antisocial , which is a bond-building mask. I do everything I can to maintain as much strength in the hair as possible.”
For those unfamiliar with the double process of bleaching and toning , the first part causes the hair shaft to swell, opening and roughening the cuticle. For someone with fine hair like Liz, who has trouble holding a curl or maintaining any additional volume, this can give the hair significantly more texture and body. Consider it an added bonus of the process (although it does tend to leave the hair much drier than before). As the bleach removes the color from the hair, the brunette shade lightens to red, then orange, then yellow, until you reach the desired amount of lightness.
