What Is Sylvania Platinum's (LON:SLP) P/E Ratio After Its Share Price Rocketed?
Sylvania Platinum ( LON:SLP ) shares have had a really impressive month, gaining 31%, after some slippage. That brought the twelve month gain to a very sharp 55%.
Assuming no other changes, a sharply higher share price makes a stock less attractive to potential buyers. In the long term, share prices tend to follow earnings per share, but in the short term prices bounce around in response to short term factors (which are not always obvious). The implication here is that deep value investors might steer clear when expectations of a company are too high. Perhaps the simplest way to get a read on investors' expectations of a business is to look at its Price to Earnings Ratio (PE Ratio). A high P/E ratio means that investors have a high expectation about future growth, while a low P/E ratio means they have low expectations about future growth.
Does Sylvania Platinum Have A Relatively High Or Low P/E For Its Industry?
Sylvania Platinum's P/E of 4.76 indicates relatively low sentiment towards the stock. If you look at the image below, you can see Sylvania Platinum has a lower P/E than the average (7.4) in the metals and mining industry classification.
Sylvania Platinum's P/E tells us that market participants think it will not fare as well as its peers in the same industry. While current expectations are low, the stock could be undervalued if the situation is better than the market assumes. It is arguably worth checking if insiders are buying shares , because that might imply they believe the stock is undervalued.
P/E ratios primarily reflect market expectations around earnings growth rates. Earnings growth means that in the future the 'E' will be higher. And in that case, the P/E ratio itself will drop rather quickly. Then, a lower P/E should attract more buyers, pushing the share price up.
Sylvania Platinum's earnings made like a rocket, taking off 182% last year. The cherry on top is that the five year growth rate was an impressive 65% per year. With that kind of growth rate we would generally expect a high P/E ratio.
Don't forget that the P/E ratio considers market capitalization. Thus, the metric does not reflect cash or debt held by the company. Theoretically, a business can improve its earnings (and produce a lower P/E in the future) by investing in growth. That means taking on debt (or spending its cash).
While growth expenditure doesn't always pay off, the point is that it is a good option to have; but one that the P/E ratio ignores.
How Does Sylvania Platinum's Debt Impact Its P/E Ratio?
Sylvania Platinum has net cash of US$34m. This is fairly high at 21% of its market capitalization. That might mean balance sheet strength is important to the business, but should also help push the P/E a bit higher than it would otherwise be.
Sylvania Platinum's P/E is 4.8 which is below average (14.0) in the GB market. Not only should the net cash position reduce risk, but the recent growth has been impressive. The below average P/E ratio suggests that market participants don't believe the strong growth will continue. What we know for sure is that investors are becoming less uncomfortable about Sylvania Platinum's prospects, since they have pushed its P/E ratio from 3.6 to 4.8 over the last month. For those who like to invest in turnarounds, that might mean it's time to put the stock on a watchlist, or research it. But others might consider the opportunity to have passed.
Investors should be looking to buy stocks that the market is wrong about. If it is underestimating a company, investors can make money by buying and holding the shares until the market corrects itself. So this free report on the analyst consensus forecasts could help you make a master move on this stock.
Of course you might be able to find a better stock than Sylvania Platinum. So you may wish to see this free collection of other companies that have grown earnings strongly.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
