The Business Platinum card is offering a welcome bonus of 75,000 points after you spend $15,000 on qualifying purchases within the first 3 months of account opening. Based on TPG’s most recent monthly valuations , this bonus is worth $1,500.
You'll have to spend $15,000 in the first three months to earn the 75,000-point bonus. That may be a tall order for many small-business owners, but if you have high inventory turnover or are growing your business, this card may help make your normal business activity much more rewarding.
The bonus is far from the only reason to consider this card. In fact, it's the perks that set this card apart, including five not available on The Platinum Card® from American Express :
35% rebate when you Pay With Points for a first-class or business-class ticket on a selected qualifying airline booked on amextravel.com (up to 500,000 points per year, or even more with greater annual spending )
Up to $100 in statement credits between January and June and up to $100 in statement credits between July and December for U.S. purchases with Dell on your enrolled Business Platinum card
Just like the personal version of this card, you'll receive an annual up to $200 airline-fee credit , access to Centurion Lounges , Delta Sky Clubs ( when flying Delta) , Priority Pass lounges (free for you and two guests), along with Airspace lounges. You'll also get up to a $100 Global Entry / TSA PreCheck application credit once every four years, Gold elite status in Hilton Honors , Gold elite status with Marriott Bonvoy .
With the Business Platinum, you’ll earn 5x points when you purchase airfare or prepaid hotel rooms through Amex Travel, and a pedestrian 1 point per dollar on all other purchases. The one exception is purchases of $5,000 or more, which earn 1.5 points per dollar, up to 1 million extra points per year.
For all of this, you'll pay a $595 annual fee.
Who should get the Amex Business Platinum?
Business travelers (especially overseas): This is a no-brainer, especially with all this card has to offer the global traveler. One perk not mentioned above is this card's lack of foreign transaction fees, meaning you won't get dinged for purchases made outside the U.S.
The business card also offers a few more travel-related perks than the personal version, although you'll be missing out on up to $200 in annual Uber credits and the 5x points on airfare purchased directly from an airline if you opt for the business version. Still, the 5x points on airfare and hotels booked via Amex Travel can prove extremely rewarding, as Membership Rewards points are worth 2 cents apiece, according to TPG's valuations .
Businesses with big general expenses: Although you can find business credit cards that offer better rewards on bonus categories such as office supplies and internet expenses , most cards offer 1 point per dollar on everyday spending . But if your business routinely makes large purchases of $5,000 or more, the 1.5 points per dollar bonus on big purchases with the Business Platinum is better than you might find elsewhere.
And if your business makes thousands of dollars in credit card purchases monthly, that huge spend on the welcome bonus won't seem daunting. In fact, in that case there shouldn't be much debate about whether to apply for this card with the current bonus offer.
Transfer your Membership Rewards points to British Airways to take advantage of its distance-based ... [+] award chart.
Owners who value transfer partners: The most lucrative way to redeem Membership Rewards points is to transfer them to one of Amex's 19 partner airlines or three hotels . If you're willing to put in the time and research, going the transfer route can increase the value of your points even above our valuations.
For example, The Points Guy himself transferred 68,000 points to British Airways to fly first class from London (LHR) to Accra (ACC) plus $462 in taxes/fees — a flight that would have cost him more than $11,669 to buy. That redemption netted 16 cents a point.
Someone who has the American Express® Business Gold Card : This could provide a one-two punch when it comes to earning Membership Rewards. Use the Business Gold Amex to fill in the blanks left by the Business Platinum card. With the Business Gold, you’ll earn 4x Membership Rewards points on the two categories in which you spend the most each month from the following list:
While you're capped at $150,000 a year for this 4x earning (then 1x), that 8% return is pretty sweet and Amex will even recalculate your top spending categories each month, to make sure you earn the maximum number of points possible.
Who shouldn't get the Amex Business Platinum?
Businesses with spending needs that don't revolve around travel: This card has little value if you're not regularly catching planes or spending the night in a hotel. You're also wasting earning opportunities if you spend a good deal of money on office supplies, internet service or advertising. There are other, better options for you, including the Ink Business Cash Credit Card. The information for the Ink Business Cash has been collected independently by The Points Guy. The card details on this page have not been reviewed or provided by the card issuer.
Owners with more modest business expenses: If you don't average roughly $8,300 a month in business spending, this card may not be worth it to you, or at least not with its current limited-time elevated bonus. That's about the amount of spending it will take to qualify for the full welcome bonus.
The personal version of the Amex Platinum has many of the same perks, so it might be a stretch to ... [+] carry it and the Business Platinum.
Someone who already has the personal version of the card: Since there are so many similarities between the business and personal versions of this card, it might be hard to justify having both. First, you'll need to figure out if you can spend enough to earn both bonuses. Then you'll want to consider whether you’ll use the 1.5x points per dollar on purchases of at least $5,000. Outside of the bonus, another key consideration in whether or not to get the business version is keeping your personal and business expenses separate , and whether or not you can stomach paying more than $1,000 in annual fees for your Platinum cards.
Businesses that need many employee cards: Although you can get up to 99 Platinum employee cards, Amex says it will charge you $199 annually for each additional Business Platinum card you request, and $50 annually if you request Amex Business Gold cards for your employees to use. That's a pretty hefty price to pay, particularly when there are other business-card options that offer free employee cards, like the Capital One® Spark® Cash for Business . The information for the Capital One Spark Cash has been collected independently by The Points Guy. The card details on this page have not been reviewed or provided by the card issuer.
TPG considers The Business Platinum Card from American Express to be one of the best business credit cards with good reason — it has fantastic value for the heavy business traveler and it's currently offering one of the most valuable limited-time welcome bonuses on the market.
If you're able to meet the hefty spending requirement, you probably shouldn't need much more convincing to get this card. On the other hand, it's a much more dicey proposition (alright, probably a bad idea) for a business owner who sticks to the ground — particularly when there are so many great options out there to earn points, miles and cash back on the business expenses that matter most to you.
Editorial Disclaimer: Opinions expressed here are the author's alone, not those of any bank, credit card issuer, airlines or hotel chain, and have not been reviewed, approved or otherwise endorsed by any of these entities.
Brian Kelly is the founder and CEO of The Points Guy (TPG), the preeminent voice in the industry of points, miles and everything travel-related. Kelly launched TPG in
Brian Kelly is the founder and CEO of The Points Guy (TPG), the preeminent voice in the industry of points, miles and everything travel-related. Kelly launched TPG in 2010 during his time as a Wall Street road warrior, where he developed his keen sense for maximizing travel experiences while minimizing spending. Since then, Kelly has grown the company into a powerhouse travel and lifestyle media platform, and through a team of distinguished editors and freelancers that span the globe, has expanded its editorial content to include flight and hotel reviews, curated travel guides, immersive video reviews, as well as global event activations. Voted Forbes #1 travel influencer in 2017, Kelly is the industry leader, shaping the way consumers and brands approach travel. Today, TPG has a dedicated fan base, receiving 10 million unique monthly visitors and more than 3 million followers on social media.
