Motley Fool Australia » Share Fallers » Why Coca-Cola Amatil, Newcrest, Platinum, & Whitehaven Coal are dropping lower
James Mickleboro | April 17, 2020 11:23am | More on: CCL NCM PTM WHC
The S&P/ASX 200 Index (ASX: XJO) is on course to end the week on a very positive note thanks to promising COVID-19 treatment news . In late morning trade the benchmark index is up a sizeable 2.5% to 5,550.8 points.
Four shares that have failed to follow the market higher today are listed below. Here’s why they are dropping lower on Friday:
The Coca-Cola Amatil Ltd (ASX: CCL) share price is down 2.5% to $8.96. Investors have been selling the beverage company’s shares this morning following the release of a trading update . That update revealed that Coca-Cola Amatil has experienced a sharp decline in sales volume this month because of the coronavirus pandemic.
The Newcrest Mining Limited (ASX: NCM) share price is down 2.5% to $28.65. News of the potential COVID-19 treatment has led to investors scrambling to buy risk on assets again. This has put a lot of pressure on risk off assets like the gold miners. So much so, the S&P/ASX All Ordinaries Gold index is down 1.8% at the time of writing.
The Platinum Asset Management Ltd (ASX: PTM) share price has fallen almost 4.5% to $3.33. This morning analysts at Morgan Stanley retained their underweight rating and cut their price target on this asset manager’s shares to $2.70. The broker believes that Platinum could experience fund outflows of around $2 billion in the second half of FY 2020.
The Whitehaven Coal Ltd (ASX: WHC) share price has dropped 4.5% to $1.77. Investors have been selling the coal miner’s shares after analysts at Macquarie downgraded them to an underperform rating and cut their price target to $1.80. The broker made the move after its latest quarterly update fell short of expectations. As a result of this poor performance, the broker expects Whitehaven Coal to miss its production guidance for FY 2020.
We hear it over and over from investors, "I wish I had bought Altium or Afterpay when they were first recommended by The Motley Fool. I'd be sitting on a gold mine!" And it's true.
And while Altium and Afterpay have had a good run, we think these 5 other stocks are screaming buys . And you can buy them now for less than $5 a share!
Motley Fool contributor James Mickleboro has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool Australia has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy . This article contains general investment advice only (under AFSL 400691). Authorised by Scott Phillips.
