Eurasia Mining (LSE: EUA) shares surged recently from a little less than 0.5p to 4p before dropping back to 2.75p . Does that mean the opportunity for investors has been and gone? I don’t believe so; indeed, I have a sneaky feeling that the real growth in this company is ahead of us.
Eurasia Mining is currently valued at £73 million. While it made an overall, or comprehensive, loss in its latest six-monthly period, there is a lot going for this company. Factor that in, and the shares appear to be quite cheap.
The company operates in three regions: there’s the West Kytlim mine situated in Russia’s Ural Mountains, where production has recently commenced; there’s the Monchetundra project in the north west of Russia near the border with Finland; and there’s the Semenovsjy Tailings project situated in The Republic of Bashkiria, at the southern end of the Urals, a few hundred miles to the east of the Caspian Sea.
The company’s focus is the platinum family of precious metals, or PGM, mainly platinum itself, palladium, iridium and rhodium. It also has interests in other metals including gold.
Number one, the company says that the total reserve base of raw platinum at its West Kytlim mine is 73,000 ounces and resources of raw platinum is 400,000 ounces. Platinum prices are at $994 an ounce. Palladium is almost double that price. At Monchetundra, where development is at a much earlier stage than at West Kytlim, total reserves and resources seem even greater.
Number two, Eurasia Mining has an impressive track record for extending its operating licences. To begin with, its licence to operate at West Kytlim was restricted to 21.5 kilometres squared. Now it is also exploring the West Kytlim flanks, an area of 71.1 kilometres squared. I expect the total area that it either explores or mines to carry on expanding, unless it sells some of its assets at a handsome profit.
Thirdly, it has greatly increased its potential profit at the West Kytlim mine by replacing contractors with its in-house resource. Not only does this lead to a very significant increase in margins, but it improves reliability too, making the company less reliant on third parties. I expect both output and profit per unit of output to rise dramatically in the next year.
Impressive though these three factors are, they don’t cover the reason why I am especially positive about the company. I think there is a good chance that the platinum price will increase – after all compared to gold it seems cheap – while I think that palladium could be set to see a big jump in price. Then there is rhodium, which already commands a very high price — almost $6,000 an ounce.
Why am I so confident? Johnson Matthey, the science and chemicals company, publishes a regular and detailed report on platinum minerals — the PGM market report.
The latest report is especially upbeat about palladium, which plays an important role in cutting carbon emissions in catalytic converters — so it is in vogue and likely to remain so for some time.
The value of these metals – not just platinum and palladium but rhodium too – coupled with its proven and improving expertise, means that Eurasia Mining shares could see a much greater lift.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Michael Baxter has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
