Sebastian Bowen | August 22, 2019 10:17am | More on: MFG PTM
The Platinum Asset Management Ltd (ASX: PTM) share price is trading near 7-year lows after yet another dismal earnings report this week sent its shares crashing below the $4.10 mark for the first time since 2012. It’s a spectacular fall from grace for what used to be one of the most successful Australian fund managers.
What were Platinum’s numbers like?
Put simply, there’s not a lot to love in what Platinum has put out:
What’s gone wrong for Platinum?
Platinum has noted that the poor and ‘market-lagging’ performance of its investment vehicles has underpinned this result – underperformance can translate into lower fund flows and lower investment performance fees in a self-perpetuating cycle. Primarily a value investing firm, Platinum has clearly been struggling with the record 10-year bull-run of global markets – with Platinum’s Chairman lamenting the “growing divergence between growth and perceived safety on one hand and attractive valuation on the other”.
Whilst I personally sympathise with Platinum over the (likely temporary) death of value investing, you can’t ignore that Platinum’s arch-rival investment firm Magellan Financial Group Ltd (ASX: MFG), which also follows a value bias (albeit with more of a growth twist), has seen a surge in FUM over the past two years on top of the stellar outperformance of its own investment vehicles. This has seen Magellan’s share price more than double over the year so far, whilst Platinum is at 7-year lows.
If an examination of the history of the stock market tells us anything, it is that shares move in patterns that may persist for a time, but never in perpetuity. Platinum CEO Andrew Clifford did have a pertinent observation in his letter to shareholders: “Value, having outperformed growth for much of the period since the 1930s, has now trailed growth for 12 years, the longest period in history. Indeed, it is worth noting that the last period of significant outperformance of growth over value ended with the ‘tech wreck’ of 2001.” Whilst I am not encouraged by these results from Platinum, I do think its time in the sun will come again.
We hear it over and over from investors, "I wish I had bought Altium or Afterpay when they were first recommended by The Motley Fool. I'd be sitting on a gold mine!" And it's true.
And while Altium and Afterpay have had a good run, we think these 5 other stocks are screaming buys . And you can buy them now for less than $5 a share!
Motley Fool contributor Sebastian Bowen has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool Australia has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy . This article contains general investment advice only (under AFSL 400691). Authorised by Scott Phillips.
