Does It Make Sense to Pay for Gold or Platinum Coverage?
All of this is confusing for sure, and you may be wondering why anyone would want a plan that only covers 60% of healthcare expenses with a high deductible to boot. In reality, though, high-deductible health insurance plans are usually the best deal from a financial standpoint.
Lev Barinskiy, CEO of insurance comparison engine SmartFinancial says that how much you use healthcare could be the most important differential.
"It never makes sense for a young person with no ailments and no pre-existing conditions to buy gold or platinum coverage because they simply will not benefit from the extra coverage,” says Barinskiy. “A person in their early 20s, for instance, may see the doctor once or twice a year and often takes no prescription medications. This person would be wasting their money."
That’s because, for the most part, Gold and Platinum plans ask you to “prepay” your deductible and annual out-of-pocket maximum for the year in the form of higher premiums. So you may pay less out-of-pocket if you get sick, but your monthly premiums will be higher — and sometimes considerably higher — all along the way.
Here’s an example to illustrate this.
Using the search engine at Healthcare.gov, a 40-year old single man in Indiana who earns too much to qualify for premium subsidies might pay between $337.31 per month and $682.83 per month for a health insurance plan. Where the cheapest plan available to him comes with a $7,700 annual deductible and a $8,150 annual out-of-pocket maximum, the most expensive plan available comes with a $2,000 deductible and a $6,500 annual out-of-pocket max.
With the cheaper Bronze plan, this person would pay $4,047.72 in premiums for the year and a total of $12,197 if they got really sick and hit their out-of-pocket maximum.
With the more expensive Gold plan, on the other hand, he would pay $8,193.96 per year in premiums and a total of $14,693.96 if he hit his annual out-of-pocket maximum.
In this case, the Gold plan would leave this individual with higher monthly costs and higher total costs if they were to get sick and hit their annual maximum. With a Bronze plan, on the other hand, they would be able to enjoy lower premiums all year long. Then, if they didn’t have a major medical issue come up, they could keep the difference in premiums.
Better yet, consumers with high-deductible plans can save money in a health savings account, or HSA . These accounts let you save for healthcare expenses in a tax-advantaged way, your money grows tax-free, then you can use the funds for qualified healthcare expenses without paying taxes once you’re ready.
Sadly, the individual in the example above wouldn’t be able to use an HSA with the cheapest plan in their state.
For a high-deductible health plan to qualify for an HSA in 2020 , the annual out-of-pocket maximum must be under $6,900 for individuals and $13,800 for families. As a side note, health insurance plans must also meet a minimum deductible requirement of at least $1,400 for individuals and $2,800 for families.
Jan Dubauskas, who serves as Vice President and Senior Counsel at Health Insurance Innovations , Inc. (HIIQ), says that Gold and Platinum plans can still make sense for some consumers, including people who have chronic conditions and expect to have high healthcare costs throughout the year.
Depending on the plan and the difference in monthly and annual out-of-pocket costs, that can really make sense. For example, if annual out-of-pocket maximums including premiums paid were comparable for a Bronze Plan or a Gold or Platinum plan in your state, it might be easier to spread those costs out more equally in the form of a higher premiums all year vs. paying lower premiums and having to meet your deductible and annual out-of-pocket maximum amount all at once.
Buying a more robust health insurance plan can also make sense if the better plans in your area are the only ones that include your doctor or preferred hospital. You might also decide to go with a premium health insurance plan if you take a lot of prescription medicine and the pricier plans cover the drugs you need.
If you’re fairly healthy, you’re almost always better off opting for a cheaper plan that lets you save on premiums all year. Here’s my personal advice: Choose a plan that lets you save money in an HSA, then funnel the premiums savings into your account so your money can grow over time. If you ultimately wind up having to use your HSA funds to hit your deductible because you get sick, you’ll be glad you set the money aside. If not, your money will keep growing tax-free, and it will be there when you need it .
I'm a personal finance expert that focuses on helping millennials get out of student loan debt and start investing for their future.  I also help parents make smart
I'm a personal finance expert that focuses on helping millennials get out of student loan debt and start investing for their future.  I also help parents make smart choices about college financing options and navigating the complex world of paying for school.  I started The College Investor in 2009 as a forum to discuss the myriad of financial issues facing young adults.  I majored in Political Science at UC San Diego, and received my MBA from the Rady School of Management at UC San Diego.  
To learn more about me, go to TheCollegeInvestor.com, or follow me on Twitter @collegeinvestin.
