Here is how I weighed my options and what I decided to do:
Via a downgrade, you can quickly reduce your annual fee without totally losing your account and its history. I would have considered downgrading to a no-annual-fee card such as the Amex EveryDay® Credit Card from American Express , and then eventually upgrading back to the Amex Platinum when the time was right. However, downgrading to a credit card isn’t allowed by Amex, so your only options are the Amex Gold and Amex Green , with annual fees of $250 and $150, respectively (see Amex Gold rates and fees , and Amex Green rates and fees ).
The information for the The Amex EveryDay® Credit Card from American Express has been collected independently by The Points Guy. The card details on this page have not been reviewed or provided by the card issuer.
Related reading: What’s the difference between a charge card and a credit card?
I already have the Amex Gold, and although it’s a card I use to get 4x points on groceries and restaurants , I didn’t want to have a second card.
Also, I have had my Platinum account for four years compared to my Gold account, which I’ve had for two years. If I were to decide to downgrade in the future, I would downgrade my Platinum to the Gold and then cancel my existing Gold account. Why? Because  your credit score is determined in part by the length of your credit history, an older account with a healthy credit history is better than a younger one.
As for the Amex Green , because of Amex’s once-per-lifetime bonus rule , I didn’t want to change to this card because I’d lose the opportunity to earn a welcome bonus in the future.
Related reading: Will I pay the full annual fee when product changing a credit card?
I’m hoping to be able to visit a Centurion Lounge by late this year. (Photo by Zach Griff/The Points Guy)
Although I strongly considered canceling the card, I put a lot of value in the Platinum card and am confident that I’ll be able to fully make use of it again later this year. By canceling — and then reapplying months from now — I’d waste a valuable slot in Chase’s 5/24 rule , and it’s not like I would qualify for another welcome bonus.
Now with the new perks valued at $320 for the rest of 2020, it makes even less sense to cancel if you can actually make use of these benefits.
After carefully weighing my options, I ultimately decided to keep my Amex Platinum account open and pay the annual fee. My hypothesis is that I won’t be flying for at least six months (through fall 2020). That means for this time period, I won’t be able to use benefits such as Amex Centurion Lounge access or the Platinum’s included hotel and car rental elite status. That’s a significant drawback, no doubt.
However, there are plenty of nontravel benefits that I will use in the interim with Uber and Saks Fifth Avenue (and now streaming and wireless credits). Also, I highly value the customer service I receive from the Premium Global Assist® Hotline and took that into consideration, too. Phone calls from Amex Platinum reps are answered instantly, even during the pandemic.
Finally, let’s say that in a couple of months from now I see that travel won’t be in the cards even later this year, or my financial situation has changed. I can still decide to downgrade to the Amex Gold and receive a prorated refund on the Platinum’s annual fee.
In previous years, I have been able to reduce my effective annual fee through the various credits and premium travel perks. I still use the following perks that help offset the $550.
Up to $200 in annual Uber credits — I order Uber Eats for food delivery in New York City and easily use this benefit.
Up to $100 in Saks Fifth Avenue credits — I have used this to purchase some travel accessories and easily use this benefit.
New: Up to $120 in streaming credit — I’ll use this toward my Netflix and Spotify bills each month.
New: Up to $120 in wireless credit  — I’m on a family plan, so I won’t be able to use this benefit, unfortunately.
The tough part here for me is the $200 airline incidental fee credit . Amex hasn’t made this the easiest to use. It is no longer possible to purchase airline gift cards to trigger the credit, so it’s not only more difficult to use when you’re not traveling, it’s difficult to use period. However, I’m confident I’ll be able to use the airline credit through a few methods that still trigger the benefit .
I’ve been able to take advantage of many Amex offers on my Platinum card which have helped to slightly offset the annual fee. These include discounts on merchants I would be shopping with anyway such as grocery stores and Amazon.
Although I can’t use some of the Amex Platinum perks currently, I decided to keep the card even though I won’t be doing much spending other than what it takes to earn the credits being offered.
This isn’t a strategy that makes sense for everyone, but this is the decision that works for me. In about a month, I will reevaluate what’s happening in the world and whether I should downgrade this account to the Amex Gold. Until then, I plan to use my Uber, Saks and streaming credits to make the most of the card.
For rates and fees of the Amex Platinum, click here .
For rates and fees of the Amex Gold Card, please click here .
For rates and fees of the Amex Green card, please click here .
Featured photo by Eric Helgas/The Points Guy.
I would like to subscribe to The Points Guy newsletters and special email promotions. The Points Guy will not sell your email.												 See PRIVACY POLICY.
Welcome to The Points Guy!
Chris Dong is a full-time writer at The Points Guy focusing on credit card benefits and points & miles. He loves all things travel—and making it accessible to everyone.
CARD HIGHLIGHTS: Delta Sky Club and Centurion lounge access, up to $200 annual airline fee credit and up to $200 in Uber credits annually
*Bonus value is an estimated value calculated by TPG and not the card issuer. View our latest valuations here .
Earn 60,000 Membership Rewards® points after you use your new Card to make $5,000 in purchases in your first 3 months.
Enjoy VIP status and up to $200 in Uber savings on rides or eats orders in the US annually. Uber Cash and Uber VIP status available to Basic Card Member only.
5X Membership Rewards® points on flights booked directly with airlines or with American Express Travel.
5X Membership Rewards points on prepaid hotels booked on amextravel.com.
Enjoy access to the Global Lounge Collection, the only credit card airport lounge access program that includes proprietary lounge locations around the world.
Receive complimentary benefits with an average total value of $550 with Fine Hotels & Resorts® program at over 1,000 properties. Learn More.
$200 Airline Fee Credit, up to $200 in statement credits per calendar year in baggage fees and more at one qualifying airline.
Get up to $100 in statement credits annually for purchases at Saks Fifth Avenue on your Platinum Card®. That’s up to $50 in statement credits semi-annually. Enrollment required.
