Moreover, trading palladium through CFDs is often commission-free, with brokers making a small profit from the spread - and traders trying to profit from the overall change in price.
Additionally, the 10% margin offered by Capital.com means that you have to deposit only 10% of the value of the trade you want to open, and the rest is covered by your CFD provider. For example, if you want to place a trade for $1,000 worth of palladium CFDs and your broker requires 10% margin, you will need only $100 as the initial capital to open the trade.
Why trade palladium CFDs with Capital.com?
Advanced AI technology at its core: A Facebook-like news feed provides users with personalised and unique content depending on their preferences. If a trader makes decisions based on biases, the innovative SmartFeed offers a range of materials to put him or her back on the right track. The neural network analyses in-app behaviour and recommends videos and articles to help polish your investment strategy. This will help you to refine your approach when you trade palladium .
Trading on margin: Thanks to margin trading, Capital.com provides you with the opportunity to trade palladium CFDs and other top-traded commodities, even with a limited amount of funds in your account.
Trading the difference: By trading palladium CFDs , you don’t buy the underlying asset itself. You only speculate on the rise or fall of the palladium price . CFD trading is no different from traditional trading in terms of its associated strategies. A CFD trader can go short or long, set stop and limit losses and apply trading scenarios that align with his or her objectives.
All-round trading analysis: The browser-based platform allows traders to shape their own market analysis and make forecasts with sleek technical indicators. Capital.com provides live market updates and various chart formats, available on desktop, iOS, and Android.
Focus on safety: Capital.com puts a special emphasis on safety. Licensed by CySEC, it complies with all regulations and ensures that its clients’ data security comes first. The company allows clients to withdraw money 24/7 and keeps traders’ funds in segregated bank accounts.
Buying shares of mining and exploration companies is another popular, albeit indirect way of trading palladium . In times when palladium is rising, investors in palladium stocks can profit. A list of some of the key players in the palladium market includes the following businesses:
The world’s largest palladium producer. The company’s shares are listed and traded on the London Stock Exchange (LSE) and Moscow Stock Exchange (MCX).
South African company, engaged in the production and sale of PGMs. The company’s shares are traded over-the-counter (OTC).
Canadian company engaged in exploration of palladium , platinum, gold, copper, nickel and other metals. The company’s shares are listed and traded on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX).
Canadian company, specialising in the development of base and precious metal properties in Canada and South Africa. The company’s shares are listed and traded on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).
Considered as one of the rarest metals in the world, palladium has always been rather volatile. It is subject to both investment and industrial demand, which significantly drives its price.
The major palladium commodity price drivers are:
Palladium has diverse technological applications and is widely used in automotive and nuclear industries.
China is the world’s top palladium consumer, which is capable to increase the consumption rate for years ahead.
Today, more and more traders get exposed to precious metals. As silver and gold trading may become overcrowded, traders might search for new ways to gain exposure to precious metals, including palladium .
Mining becomes even more challenging business, as energy costs increase. In light of electricity and fuel costs rise, mining operations could close. This can result in higher palladium price .
The risks of investing in palladium include a global recession, which can weaken Chinese and US automobile demand, cheaper substitutes and global political and economic control.
In terms of historical price action, the commodity reached its record low of $78 in August 1991.
On December 2, 2019, the palladium market price hit its new all-time high of $1,838 per oz. Since the beginning of the year, this precious metal has gained $547 per oz, or almost 45 per cent.
Where does palladium come from?
Until the 20th century, palladium was not widely used for commercial purposes.
In 1920s new deposits of this rare metal were discovered in South Africa and later in Canada. Soon, platinum and palladium got popularity in dental industry. After the discovery of palladium’s outstanding catalytic properties, it became essential to the design of catalytic converters.
