The presence of the platinum commodity in an equity-only portfolio can lower the volatility, due to the absence of a correlation between the metal and other asset classes.
Commodities can serve as a safe haven in times of global economic uncertainty and market turbulence, because they can retain their value.
Commodities’ intrinsic value is independent from currencies. They will often hold their value, even if a currency falls during a period of inflation.
Commodities may be highly volatile, experiencing wild price swings. Trading platinum CFDs is one way to try and profit from drastic platinum price fluctuations.
Trading platinum requires some consideration, due to the market’s occasional high volatility and a wide choice of available instruments, from platinum derivatives , such as futures and CFDs, to platinum mining company stocks.
The metal's importance as an industrial material, its relatively low production, and concentration among a few suppliers can make its price volatile. Trading platinum can result in a high degree of risk. The chance of making large profits goes hand in hand with the risk of large losses.
One of the easiest and most popular ways to trade platinum is with CFDs.
A contract for difference (CFD) is a type of contract between a trader and a broker in order to try and profit from the price difference between opening and closing the trade.
Investing in platinum CFDs saves you the inconvenience of paying for platinum storage. In addition, CFDs give you the opportunity to trade platinum in both directions. No matter whether you have a positive or negative view of the platinum price forecast and predictions, you can try to profit from either the upward or downward future price movement.
Moreover, trading platinum through CFDs is often commission-free, with brokers making a small profit from the spread – and traders trying to profit from the overall change in price.
Additionally, the 10% margin offered by Capital.com means that you have to deposit only 10% of the value of the trade you want to open, and the rest is covered by your CFD provider. For example, if you want to place a trade for $1,000 worth of platinum CFDs and your broker requires 10% margin, you will need only $100 as the initial capital to open the trade.
Why trade platinum CFDs with Capital.com?
Advanced AI technology at its core: A Facebook-like news feed provides users with personalised and unique content depending on their preferences. If a trader makes decisions based on biases, the innovative SmartFeed offers a range of materials to put him or her back on the right track. The neural network analyses in-app behaviour and recommends videos and articles to help polish your investment strategy. This will help you to refine your approach when you trade platinum .
Trading on margin: Thanks to margin trading, Capital.com provides you with the opportunity to trade platinum CFDs and other top-traded commodities, even with a limited amount of funds in your account.
Trading the difference: By trading platinum CFDs , you don’t buy the underlying asset itself. You only speculate on the rise or fall of the platinum spot price . CFD trading is no different from traditional trading in terms of its associated strategies. A CFD trader can go short or long, set stop and limit losses and apply trading scenarios that align with his or her objectives.
All-round trading analysis: The browser-based platform allows traders to shape their own market analysis and make forecasts with sleek technical indicators. Capital.com provides live market updates and various chart formats, available on desktop, iOS, and Android.
Focus on safety: Capital.com puts a special emphasis on safety. Licensed by CySEC, it complies with all regulations and ensures that its clients’ data security comes first. The company allows clients to withdraw money 24/7 and keeps traders’ funds in segregated bank accounts.
Buying shares of mining and exploration companies is another popular, albeit indirect way of trading platinum . In times when platinum is rising, investors in platinum stocks can profit. A list of some of the key players in the platinum market includes the following businesses:
The world’s largest primary producer of platinum . It accounts for 38% of the global annual supply of platinum. The company’s shares are listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE).
A leading producer of platinum and associated PGMs. Originally, the company was known as Bishopsgate Platinum. Its shares are listed on the Johannesburg (JSE) and London Stock Exchange (LSE).
A British producer of platinum group metals. The popular British newspaper the Observer once owned the business. Lonmin’s shares are listed on the Johannesburg (JSE) and London Stock Exchange (LSE).
Russian nickel and palladium mining and smelting company. The company’s shares are listed on the London (LSE) and Moscow Stock exchange (MCX).
The world’s third largest producer of platinum , also involved in gold production. The company’s shares are listed on the Johannesburg (JSE) and New York Stock Exchange (NYSE).
Historically, platinum is subject to both investment and industrial demand, which significantly drives its price. In terms of global supply, South Africa accounts for a large percentage of platinum production and this production also has a strong impact on its price.
Therefore, the major platinum price drivers are:
95% of the world’s platinum reserves belong to South Africa, which makes it a top platinum producer with 75% of the global platinum supply. Volatile markets due to  political unrest or labour strikes, may slow down the production.
40% of the world’s demand for platinum comes  from catalytic converters. Therefore, the automotive industry has a significant impact on platinum commodity prices. When the auto industry is in good health, platinum tends to performs better.
Due to a relatively high price of platinum , auto manufacturers are looking for alternative technologies. With the development of these technologies, platinum demand may decrease.
Though the investment demand for platinum commodity represents only a small part of the overall annual demand, US dollar weakness and high prices for gold may cause increased investors’ interest in platinum.
In terms of historical price action, platinum hit its all-time high of $2,253 per oz in March 2008. The platinum commodity’s record low of $97.70 happened in January 1972.
In 2017, the average price for platinum stood at $ 948 per troy ounce. In 2018, the average platinum price is estimated to be around $1,090. The latest platinum price per ounce (oz) as of the end of November 2019 was hovering around $901.
Where does platinum come from?
According to some recent estimates, the annual mining of platinum totals over 170,000 kilograms. However, this number tends to decline, due to the cutbacks in platinum production, caused by the relatively low prices. The largest platinum reserves are located at the Bushveld Complex in South Africa, which supplies more than 75% of the world’s output.
Meanwhile, the top 5 platinum mining countries include the following:
