The FTSE 100 has crashed over the past few weeks. Following this decline, some investors have rushed into gold, in an attempt to protect their wealth.
However, this could be a big mistake. Over the long run, shares have proven to be a much better investment than gold.
As the FTSE 100 has declined, some fantastic bargains have emerged . Blue-chip businesses that were trading at eye-watering profit multiples just a few weeks ago are now dealing at some of the cheapest levels in a decade.
On the other hand, the price of gold has surged.
This presents a dilemma for investors. FTSE 100 stocks now look cheap, but they could decline further in the weeks ahead. The price of gold, on the other hand, could increase over the coming weeks as uncertainty prevails.
The big difference between the price of gold and the FTSE 100 is the fact that the price of gold is determined by supply and demand. Meanwhile, cash flows from the underlying businesses determine the value of stocks and shares
As most companies are now facing an unprecedented operational environment, it’s challenging to determine the value of these enterprises.
Nevertheless, over the long run, the economy will likely return to normal. When it does, investors who are brave enough to buy at the bottom should be well rewarded.
That’s why I would buy FTSE 100 shares for a passive income in the current environment. While it is difficult to tell what the future holds for markets in the next few weeks and months, over the long term, the global economy should return to growth. Stocks should follow a similar trajectory.
It is difficult to say with any certainty whether or not the same will happen to gold.
As the price of gold is determined by supply and demand, if demand drops suddenly, the price could plummet. There’s a good chance that when things return to normal, investors will quickly lose their attraction to the yellow metal.
Another factor to consider is the income appeal of FTSE 100 stocks. Over the past decade, the FTSE 100 has supported an average dividend yield around 4.5%. Over the same timeframe, investors have had to pay out money to own gold. Most gold funds demand an annual management fee, and owning physical gold can be extremely expensive.
Put simply, while FTSE 100 stocks might look less appealing than gold right now, the figures suggest that over the long run, blue-chips are a better buy than the yellow metal.
That being said, nothing is stopping you from owning gold in your portfolio. Indeed, some portfolio managers recommend devoting 10% of your portfolio to gold and investing the remainder in stocks. For investors who are not sure about the right course of action to take, this could be a good option.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Rupert Hargreaves owns no share mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
