The FTSE 100’s market crash may currently be viewed negatively by investors who are seeking to obtain a seven-figure portfolio. They may see it as a major setback to their plans, since the index has declined by around 15% since the start of the year.
What’s more, it could fall further in the short run. As a result, they may look to find stronger growth opportunities via other assets, such as gold.
However, the index’s decline may prove to be an opportunity to buy the best UK shares at cheap prices. Over time, the index is likely to recover and could deliver higher returns than other mainstream assets, including gold.
Investors who’ve persisted in buying and holding a diverse range of FTSE 100 shares have been handsomely rewarded over the long run. The index has produced an annualised total return of around 8% since its inception in January 1984. That’s greater than the annualised return of gold over the same period. Despite its recent surge to trade close to an all-time high, the precious metal has returned around 4.5% per annum since the start of 1984.
Clearly, the past won’t replay perfectly in future. However, the stock market’s capacity to produce strong recoveries after a market crash has been in evidence multiple times during its history. For example, it’s recovered from bear markets, such as the 1987 crash, the tech bubble, and the financial crisis, to post new record highs. Therefore, a similar outcome seems likely following its current crisis.
Due to the FTSE 100’s likely recovery prospects, buying a range of high-quality businesses today could be a sound move. Investors can benefit from a likely improvement in investor sentiment as the world economy’s growth prospects turn positive.
By contrast, sentiment towards defensive assets, such as gold, could come under pressure over the medium term. Certainly risks, such as a growth in coronavirus cases, could catalyse the precious metal’s price in the short run. Similarly, a period of low interest rates may be favourable to its price performance.
However, as investor sentiment improves and demand for riskier assets rises, gold’s appeal could decline. As it trades at a relatively high level today, its potential to produce further growth may be somewhat limited.
Obtaining an annualised 8% return from FTSE 100 shares may mean that making a million is a long-term task for any investor. However, through buying strong companies while they’re cheap, you could improve upon the index’s past returns to generate a larger portfolio.
In the long run, it could even be valued at over £1m. And that would certainly boost your financial position compared to what it would be had you invested in other assets.
Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all fired up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the pandemic!).
But its capital-light, highly scalable business model has previously helped it deliver consistently high sales, astounding near-70% margins, and rising shareholder returns … in fact, in 2019 it returned a whopping £150m+ to shareholders in dividends and buybacks!
While COVID-19 may have thrown the company a curveball, management have acted swiftly to ensure this business is as well placed as it can be to ride out the current period of uncertainty… in fact, our analyst believes it should come roaring back to life, just as soon as normal economic activity resumes.
That’s why we think now could be the perfect time for you to start building your own stake in this exceptional business – especially given the shares look to be trading on a fairly undemanding valuation for the year to March 2021.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Growth Share… free of charge!
Peter Stephens has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
