The price of gold has surged in the recent stock market crash. Many investors feel the precious metal could offer superior returns in the current uncertain environment. However, buying bargain FTSE 100 growth shares could be a better means of improving your retirement prospects.
While the world economy faces an uncertain future, these companies have definite competitive advantages that should help them pull through and generate attractive returns for shareholders over the long run.
Gold looks attractive from a short-term perspective. The coronavirus crisis has significantly impacted the global economy. As of yet, we don’t know how long the crisis will last, and how big of an impact it will have on growth.
Central banks’ efforts to try and contain the crisis have also fuelled inflation fears. As such, gold’s status as a store of value has resonated with investors. However, while gold may provide protection in the short term, long-term investors may be better off buying FTSE 100 growth shares.
Buying shares at the current time may seem like a risky proposition. But over the past few decades, the FTSE 100 has seen many uncertain economic environments. It has a strong track record of recovering from every one of these downturns. It has often gone on to post new record highs after every slump.
Sometimes it has taken several months to recover. On other occasions, it has been years before the index recovered its losses. But if you’ve got many years left until you plan to retire, FTSE 100 growth stocks could offer higher returns than other mainstream assets.
Many of these stocks are at the forefront of technology and offer unique products and services. While these companies could experience a decline in demand in the short term, their substantial competitive advantages should help them back to health when the economic recovery gains traction.
This could help these FTSE 100 growth stocks produce better returns than gold over the long term. And now could be the perfect time to start building a portfolio of FTSE 100 shares.
After the recent stock market crash, valuations across the lead index are relatively low. This suggests investors can build a diversified portfolio of FTSE 100 growth stocks at a relatively low price.
A diversified portfolio would help reduce risk and possibly improve your chances of generating a healthy return on assets over the long run.
So, overall, now could be a great time to take advantage of the recent stock market crash and buy a range of large-cap growth shares for the long term.
These companies may not outperform gold in the short run. However, over the long haul, it’s highly likely a portfolio of undervalued FTSE 100 growth stocks will generate extremely attractive returns. And that could help you build a sizeable pension pot.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Rupert Hargreaves has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
