Investors have rushed to buy gold as stock markets around the world crashed. However, historically, gold has been a poor investment to own. As such, FTSE 100 shares might be a better investment for your portfolio today.
For the 30 years to the beginning of March, the gold price had underperformed the stock market by a factor of three. This tells us that, over the long term, gold underperforms stocks.
This trend doesn’t hold true in times of crisis. As we’ve seen over the past few weeks, when markets plunge, investors rush to buy gold. Nevertheless, if you’re serious about investing for the long term, FTSE 100 shares could be a better buy.
Some of the market’s top blue-chips are now on offer. For example, pharmaceutical giants GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca are dealing at relatively low valuations compared to history.
Even though the coronavirus outbreak has disrupted large swathes of the global economy, healthcare systems have never been busier. Over the long term, this trend should continue. The world’s population is only growing and living longer. That should translate into a growing demand for drugs and treatments over the long run.
As such, Glaxo and Astra look well-placed to continue to earn profits for shareholders.
Other FTSE 100 shares that could be an excellent alternative to gold are utilities. Even though the whole population of the UK is currently stuck in lockdown, we still need access to running water and electricity.
That’s where United Utilities and National Grid come in. These are some of the best run and financed utility businesses in the UK. They also both offer mid-single-digit dividend yields.
As the UK’s population continues to expand, demand for these companies’ services should continue to grow. That will lead to rising profits for shareholders.
If you can’t pick one company to buy, the Scottish Mortage Investment Trust is another option. Scottish Mortage owns a portfolio of some of the best tech companies in the world. The trust has an excellent track record of picking tech stocks and growing businesses that have the edge over the rest of the market.
As the global technology sector continues to expand, these businesses should do well over the long run. The trust also offers international diversification, which many FTSE 100 shares don’t.
These FTSE 100 shares could all yield a better return than gold over the long run. A significant advantage of FTSE 100 shares over gold is the fact that they produce an income.
All of the companies above, for example, offer investors a regular dividend. There’s no dividend with gold. Most of the time, investors have to pay to own gold. This can erode returns over time.
Therefore, if you’re looking for a way to protect and grow your wealth for the next 10-20 years, the FTSE 100 shares above seem to be some of the best options on the market right now.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Rupert Hargreaves owns no share mentioned. The Motley Fool UK owns shares of and has recommended GlaxoSmithKline. The Motley Fool UK has recommended AstraZeneca. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
