I thought gold was supposed to be the ultimate safe haven, the ideal asset to hold in the middle of a stock market crash. It doesn’t look that way at the moment, as the gold price has sold off along with everything else. So what’s the point of buying gold, if it doesn’t fulfil its primary purpose at times like these? I’m beginning to wonder.
Instead of chasing the gold price on the assumption that the stock market crash will continue, I would rather invest in a Stocks and Shares ISA , in the belief that the FTSE 100 will eventually recover. Whether you have £5k at your disposal, or £1k, or £2k, this is where I would start.
When the gold price hit $1,700 in last week’s stock market correction, gold bugs seem to be vindicated. Then it surprised everybody by falling itself, by around 12%, to trade around $1,495 at time of writing.
Profit-taking was partly to blame for the gold price crash. Also, fund managers started liquidating their gold holdings to pay for customer redemptions, or to shift money into cash to they could be ready to buy shares at the right time.
Those who bought at the top will have got their fingers burned, from an unlikely source. What many people fail to realise is that gold price movements can be volatile and unpredictable. That’s because gold has few practical uses and its price is largely driven by sentiment. I wouldn’t invest £5k in gold today.
Crucially, gold doesn’t pay any interest either. That should be less of a problem now, as global interest rates are being slashed and bond yields are plunging. Still, it looks hugely unappealing when you can invest in blue-chip stocks like Royal Dutch Shell and enjoy a yield of nearly 14% .
The stock market crash has been even more painful, with the FTSE 100 down roughly a third this year. For me, that makes now a time to buy shares, rather than sell, as there are some incredible bargains out there.
You have a couple of weeks before you lose this year’s £20k Stocks and Shares ISA allowance for good, at midnight on 5 April. You do not have to invest the full £20k, but try to invest some. Investing £5k today could give your future wealth a real boost, provided you hold for the long term.
Now looks like a dangerous time to buy, but if you are planning to stay invested for at least five or 10 years (20 or 30 years would be even better), this could be one of the best financial decisions you ever make. That time give your money has ages to roll up in value.
That’s especially true if you reinvest your dividends for growth, as you should. So beware today’s gold price, and consider putting stocks and shares in your ISA instead.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Harvey Jones has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
