The stock market crash has driven FTSE 100 stock valuations into bargain territory. Although share prices have recovered since their March lows, there are still plenty of buying opportunities out there. If you’re looking to build a million-pound portfolio, don’t waste this moment.
I reckon investing in cheap FTSE 100 shares is a better way to build your long-term wealth than trying to play the gold price. Demand for the precious metal surged in the early stages of the crash, but may now have topped out.
The big problem with gold is that it doesn’t pay any interest. Instead, you rely on investor sentiment to drive the price ever higher.
Buy gold not shares in the stock market crash?
Getting zero interest is less of a problem these days, as many companies cut their dividends, and cash and bonds pay so little. However, plenty of FTSE 100 companies can still give you dividend yields as high as 9% .
Next year, the FTSE 100 is still forecast to yield around 3%. That’s lower than last year’s 4.5%, but remains a decent level of income. It should rise over time as the economy emerges from the pandemic and companies restore payouts. When that happens, gold will still be paying zero income.
I think the gold price looks vulnerable at today’s high of around $1,700 an ounce. If investor sentiment picks up along with the economy, then it could soon fall back. Also, I don’t like buying assets on the back of a strong bull run. The gold price is up 34% over the last year. Given the pace of its ascent, it could fall quickly as well.
FTSE 100 stocks have picked up in recent weeks, but are still 20% lower than before the crash. This means some of the current uncertainty is priced into share values. Of course, markets could crash again. We could still face a second wave of the pandemic.
You shouldn’t fret too much about short-term market movements. When investing in stocks and shares, what matters is the long-term trend. If you’re looking to build a million-pound portfolio, that’ll take 20, 30 years, or more. Over such a lengthy period, short-term volatility such as today’s doesn’t really matter.
In fact, you can turn it to your advantage by taking the opportunity to buy cheap FTSE 100 shares at a reduced entry price. Then aim to buy and hold them for the long-term, while reinvesting dividends to turbo-charge your growth.
You could hold 5%, or 10%, of your portfolio in gold, to offset stock market risk. However, I wouldn’t recommend buying at today’s price. Maybe when it’s cheaper.
Right now, FTSE 100 stocks look more tempting to me. The recovery should ultimately drive share prices higher, plus you’ll get a growing income stream over time. You’ll never get that with gold.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Harvey Jones has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
