Even with the recent stock market recovery, the crash back in March means there are still opportunities to pick up great companies with share prices offering investors good value. You may think so-called safe havens like gold are the way to go, but I prefer shares. Here are some I like.
One of these is GlaxoSmithKline (LSE: GSK) . Despite having products people need — medicines, everyday consumer goods — the shares trade on a P/E of only 13. That seems relatively cheap .
The shares also yield 4.7% with the divident payment having been held flat as GlaxoSmithKline pours cash into finding new blockbuster drugs. On this front, some progress is being made to offset the loss of patent protection for older drugs.
In January, CEO Emma Walmsley said GSK expects six drug approvals from the FDA in 2020. Other new treatments are growing strongly already. Shingles vaccine Shingrix has grown sales 79% in the last year to £647m.
In the short-term, the development of a successful treatment for Covid-19 could excite shareholders and send the share price soaring. Something to keep an eye on.
Longer-term, if by concentrating on its drug pipeline it can come close to replicating the success of rival AstraZeneca has recently achieved, then the share price could well lift off from where it currently is. Especially as both are now focusing heavily on oncology.
Aviva (LSE: AV) , like many other insurers, was bought to heel by pressure from the regulator and scrapped its dividend. I suspect this may have come as a relief to management as the yield was burdensome and the insurer needs cash to invest in growth, which has been sluggish.
Another benefit of the scrapped dividend is the group’s capital ratio. As of 13 March, it improved by 7 percentage points to 182%. A percentage that makes the business look in good financial shape .
Now, with the share price having been hit hard by Covid-19, there could be an opportunity for patient investors. On a ludicrously low P/E of four, the shares are dirt cheap.
Especially with the potential value that cutting costs and improving products and customer service through digitisation provide for the group going forward. Both of these should help boost the bottom line, as will the improved performance in the Canadian business.
BAE Systems (LSE: BA) shares are trading on a P/E of 10. A very reasonable amount to pay for shares in a company that’s growing sales.
In the last full-year results, underlying sales rose 7% to £20.1bn. Sales rose 6% to £.3bn at the US Platforms and Services division. They were also up 7% to £4.4bn in the Electronic Systems division and, in Maritime, sales rose 5% to £3.1bn.
I’d like to see more growth from the Cyber & Intelligence division at BAE, where sales were flat. But, overall, I think the shares have growth opportunities, as a result of organic growth and smart acquisitions.
Defence spending isn’t going to go away. Coronavirus could have an impact, and could mean cost-cutting. For me, though, these shares still look a far better bet than gold in the long term.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Andy Ross owns shares in AstraZeneca. The Motley Fool UK owns shares of and has recommended GlaxoSmithKline. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
