CHICAGO, ILLINOIS - AUGUST 11: Matt Chapman #26 of the Oakland Athletics congratulates Matt Olson #28 after their team's 2-0 win over the Chicago White Sox at Guaranteed Rate Field on August 11, 2019 in Chicago, Illinois. ~~
Baseball2020 is going to be very different from baseball, and maybe more entertaining.
And here’s a Bay Area bonus: The 60-game schedule and the rule changes for the 2020  season work in  favor of the Giants and the A’s.
The A’s were well positioned as a contender in a “normal” season, and their outlook is even brighter now. The Giants figured to struggle and rebuild, but now they have the look of an interesting dark horse.
What the heck am I talking about? Thanks for asking.
Baseball is now a sprint. Every loss is  the equivalent of 2.7 losses in a standard 162-game season, so every game will be played and managed more like a playoff game than a regular-season game, because this ain’t no regular season.
Baseball has hit the fast-forward button on the languid pace of its season. Close your eyes and think back to the days when a Giants hitter would be in a slump and Bruce Bochy would growl comfortingly to the media, “Heee’ll be fiiiiine.”
Sure, he’ll work himself out of that slump. In a week or two. That was then. Now you can’t give the slumper that time.
Quick-react managing is going to be part of the new deal. Less patience with a struggling hitter or pitcher. We’ll see more frequent changes, game to game and inning to inning.
Rotations will get more juggling, based on hot hands and matchups.
They’ll be playing speed chess, not front-porch checkers. The beneficiaries of this new deal will be teams with versatile rosters and with analytics-driven leadership.
A’s third baseman Matt Chapman, fielding a ball in front of shortstop Marcus Semien in a September game, will be a key figure for the team this season.
Teams like, oh, I don’t know ... the Giants and the A’s.
Giants president of baseball operations  Farhan Zaidi, no longer the awkward new kid, has settled into a groove, and he’s one of the more analytics-oriented  men  in the game. New skipper Gabe Kapler is on board with the new stuff, and completely in sync with Zaidi, going back to their days together in the Dodgers’ organization.
Kapler’s 13-person coaching crew, to a man and woman, is analytics-savvy and programmed for quick action and reaction.
Zaidi and Kapler, in building this season’s team, have put a premium on Swiss Army knife players, which suits the quick-react style of ball.
The season is scheduled for 60 games. This opens the door for a catch-lightning-in-a-bottle team. The Giants are a wild card, clearly short on talent but a team that could flash some early spunk and then ride its  wave. If that happens, the season might not be long enough to allow the Giants to sink back  to reality.
