Gold futures gave up earlier gains on Thursday to finish lower for a third straight session. "Gold prices are always sensitive to the outlook for interest rates, but it's rarely been more strongly correlated against bond yields than it is right now," said Adrian Ash, director of research at BullionVault. "So while the plunge in the stock market should keep driving gold higher, any pullback in these surging bond prices is also going to hit gold short-term," he said. Bond prices move in the opposite direction of yields. The 10-year Treasury note yield TMUBMUSD10Y,
traded above record lows as gold priced settled. April gold gcj20 fell 60 cents, or 0.04%, to settle at $1,642.50 an ounce.
Workhorse's stock set to snap record win streak, while BTIG analyst nearly doubles price target
Shares of Workhorse Group Inc.  are down 4% in Wednesday trading, putting them on track to snap a record 9-day winning streak in which they rocketed more than 4-fold (up 321%). Analyst Gregory Lewis at BTIG reiterated his buy rating on the electric van maker's stock but boosted his price target to $26, which is 77% above current levels, from $10. Lewis said a key takeaway from a call he hosted with management on Tuesday was that the company has "first-mover" advantage, which was solidified when the Series C van received final regulatory safety approvals, giving the company a 1-to-2-year head start on other electric vehicle (EV) last-mile delivery competitors. He said this should allow the company to secure a revolving credit facility, which would allow it to scale up operations. Lewis said a major potential catalyst could be a $6 billion to $8 billion contract from the U.S. Postal Service, in which bids are due later this month, and an announcement of the winner is expected later this year. He said another bullish factor is the optionality around the company's 10% equity stake in Lordstown Motors Corp., which unveiled its EV Endurance pickup truck last week. The stock has skyrocketed 881% over the past three months. Among its EV rivals, shares of Tesla Inc.  have run up 133% the past three months and Nikola Corp.  have climbed 537%, while the S&P 500  has gained 26%.
