Gold futures have been down lately, as global investors lose interest in various safe haven assets and instead, commence investments in riskier assets.
Gold gave up on its previous gains on Tuesday morning in Asia after the U.S. shares rally overnight. The safe-haven asset in its true fashion, went down after the S&P 500 reverted its losses and turned positive for the year.
As at 12pm ET (5am GMT), gold futures were down by 0.22% to $1,701.35. Gold futures have been down lately, as global investors lose interest in various safe-haven assets and instead commence investments in riskier assets. One such asset that has witnessed even more interest is the equity market and this has been further enhanced with the U.S dollar gaining strength in recent days.
With the newly recorded positives of the S&P 500, investors had switched interest from the metal as their confidence was enhanced with the overall recovery of the economy. Consequently, their risk appetites also increased.
Stephen Innes, chief market strategist at financial services firm AxiCorp, in a note, had explained that, “The yellow metal is on a reasonably steady downtrend, most likely on the back of the great run in equity markets over the past few weeks, which could see fast money continue to sell on rallies.”
Your email address will not be published.
Gold futures were slightly down 0.02% to trade at $1,779 at 9:03 am Nigerian time.
Gold futures dropped from its record highs on Thursday morning at London’s trading session as global investors retreated from the safe-haven asset as their appetite for riskier financial assets surge.
Gold futures were slightly down 0.02% to trade at $1,779 at 9:03 am Nigerian time, after losing more than 1% yesterday at America’s trading session.
Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp in a note to Nairametrics spoke about the macros, affecting Gold as an asset. He said:
“Gold price got hammered lower after the vaccine headlines but have since stabilized and are ticking gingerly higher. A vaccine would be significant.
“However, I do not think it’s immediately or radically changing many house views on gold, which are mostly predicated on the long and bumpy road to economic recovery.
“But the next couple of weeks may tell us much about how the rest of the pandemic develops.
“Gold is still very well bid as the US remains mired amid crises, a health crisis, and a political crisis. The intense polarization of US political life and the outbreak of racial friction is making the implementation of a consistent and wide-sweeping health care policy difficult.
“Sure, a vaccine would be the ultimate salvation, but by current indications and in the absence of one, it will take longer for the US to fight off the virus than other developed economies.
Although the precious metal possesses some upside, with the present market volatility on-going, coupled with the resurgence of COVID-19 cases around the world prompting the World Health Organization to issue a stern warning yesterday, that reinstatement of lockdown measures could be required in some geopolitical zones
They talked on “ways of cooperation to enhance the stability “ of the Crude market.
Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince, Mohammed bin Salman, had a telephone call with Nigeria’s President, Muhammadu Buhari on Monday to discuss further oil production cuts in a bid to improve the global crude markets, according to the Saudi News Agency.
The agency announced both countries talked on “ways of cooperation to enhance the stability “ of the Crude market.
The Saudi ruler usually calls other members of the oil cartel to negotiate and discuss OPEC issues.
OPEC+ wants to reduce global supply by 10% or 9.7 million barrels a day, however, Nigeria has been accused of not doing its part in production cuts.
GMD of NNPC, Mele Kyari promised on June 12 that Nigeria will commence production cuts in June and will achieve full compliance by July.
Exports show Nigeria is pumping 1.38 million barrels per day, however, Nigeria’s quota to meet its production cut is 1.37 million barrels per day.
Nigeria has ignored calls for OPEC production cuts in the past as the country enters an economic recessio0n which may be its worst in 40 years caused by weak global demand for its number one export, crude oil. IMF expects the Nigerians economy to decline by 5.4% in 2020, the World Bank forecasts 4.9 million Nigerians at risk of falling into poverty this year due to the falling economy .
This was the highest reached by a benchmark Comex contract for gold since September 2011.
Gold rose beyond the $1,800 per ounce target long eyed as a result of bulls on the commodity as concerns increase over the second wave of COVID-19 infections as well as increasing stimulus measures geared towards mitigating the economic effect of the pandemic. A number of analysts also predict that the safe-haven asset would attain record highs above $2,000 in the months to come as COVID-19 cases further increase. At 6:30 am today, the price stood at $1801.5.
U.S. gold futures on Comex had risen by $19.30, or 1.1%, at $1,800.50, after hitting an intraday high at $1,803.95. This was the highest reached by a benchmark Comex contract for gold since its all-time peak of $1,911.60 in September 2011. Spot gold also increased by $8.58, or 0.5% at $1,781.20, after a session high of $1,785.97. That was also the highest since its September 2011 record of $1,920.85.
Philip Streible, the chief market strategist at Blue Line Futures in Chicago noted, “I believe that with additional lockdowns happening globally that central banks will continue to support the market at any cost. This should result in the Fed’s balance sheet continuing to grow and in turn provide underlying support in the precious metals markets. Gold should continue to track higher with $1,900 by Labor Day, $2,000 by Thanksgiving.”
In the United States, around 40,000 new coronavirus cases are announced daily in the ongoing outbreak, and it is projected to grow to as much as 100,000 daily. Top U.S. pandemics expert, Anthony Fauci said that this could be the country’s fate without adequate social-distancing amongst other safety measures. Even worse is that some health officials believe that the cases could be as much as 10 times higher than the official count. China, India and New Zealand have also had higher caseloads lately.
Another determinant of the increasing price of Gold, the U.S. Federal Reserve and Congress have also passed more than $3 trillion in stimulus to mitigate the negative impact of the pandemic on the economy.
