Gold futures drops to $1727.80 as America, China tension deepens
Gold futures dropped by 0.47% at $1,7278.23 by 14.00 pm local time, with the commodity unable to hold most of its gains from the previous session.
Gold was down in London’s trading session on Monday morning, burdened by the rising U.S.-China tensions that have continued to weaken demand for even the safe-haven asset.
Gold futures dropped by 0.47% at $1,728.23 on Monday by 14.00 pm local time, with the commodity unable to hold most of its gains from the previous session.
Why is gold so important?: Gold has unique physical properties that make it very valuable. It is the most ductile and malleable of all metals. Consequently, investors use it to hedge against paper money (inflationary fundamentals).
In addition, the friendship between the Americans and Chinese has soured, since the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic. President Trump and President Jinping of China have traded words against each other as a result of issues surrounding the pandemic. These include accusations of lack of transparency as well as claims of cover-ups.
There have also been fears over rising tensions between America and China over Beijing’s plans to begin security laws on Hong Kong, and America’s planned sanction against China.
Towards China’s plan to impose national security laws on Hong Kong, protests had sprung up leading to the use of cannons and tear gas yesterday by the Hong Kong police to disperse its citizens.
“The HK security legislation packs on a hefty amount (of) trade war risk premium,” said Stephen Innes, chief market strategist at AxiCorp, noting that it added to market worries last week about the level of Chinese policy stimulus.
Your email address will not be published.
As audited accounts start to trickle in, companies will propose dividend payments to their shareholders as recommended by their respective boards of directors. It is also important to track these announcements to know who is eligible to collect the dividend, when it will be approved and when it will be paid. Dividend payment also affects share prices.
This page will be updated from time to time.
Date Announced – The date the company announced dividends evidenced by a corporate action published on the website of the NSE.
Qualification date – Shareholders who own shares as of this date will receive dividends. If you buy shares and want to receive dividends make sure it is at least three days before this date. Shares get transferred to you on the basis of the T+3 rule (the date you bought plus 3 working days).
Payment date – This is when the dividend will be paid to you, either via post (dividend warrants) or direct credit to your bank accounts (e-dividend).
Closure of Register – Only shareholders who own shares listed in their register before this date will be paid dividends.
You can also scroll sideways to view the rest of the columns if using a mobile phone.
U.S dollar pull back some gains, investors’ appetite for risk strengthens
Global investors and currency traders are predicting futuristic gains for the greenback.
The U.S dollar pulled back some of its gains recorded previously on Thursday morning as global investors retreated from the safe-haven currency.
The U.S. Dollar Index that monitors the American dollar against a group of other major currencies lost 0.11% to 97.040 at 5.49 am Nigerian time with an appetite for risk increases, as Global stocks continued to rally leading currency traders and investors retreating from the U.S dollar
Quick fact; The U.S. Dollar Index that tracks the American dollar against a basket of other major currencies (like the Japanese yen, British pound sterling, Swedish Krona, Euro), Individuals hoping to meet foreign exchange payment obligations, via dollar transactions to countries like Europe, and Japan, would need to pay more dollars to fulfill such transactions.
READ ALSO: Gold price up as COVID-19 cases rise, U.S-China tensions heighten
Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp in a note to Nairametrics, wrote about the present market volatility in the currency market. He said;
“If you are handling the currency hot seat these days, you likely feel tethered to the end of a very reactive Yo-Yo string as currency moves in one session are faded in the next.
“Currencies have started the second half of the year, where they left off in the first and outside of the “risk-on risk-off” see-saw currency appetite struggled to find any meaningful catalysts.
“With G-10 central banks at zero or below, in the absence of any significant monetary policy transmission that leaves currency traders chasing or instead guessing which countries activity data will outperform the others, which is getting enveloped around the dichotomy between current buoyant conditions and subdued future expectations striking both in consumer sentiment and in financial-market indicators.”
However, some global investors and currency traders are predicting futuristic gains for the greenback with the resurgence of the COVID-19 cases globally. There were over 10.6 million cases as of July 2, according to Johns Hopkins University data.
“If we see further spikes in coronavirus cases, I would expect both the dollar and the yen to strengthen against other currencies,” Tohru Sasaki, head of Japan market research at J.P. Morgan, told Reuters.
We project Pre-tax Profit of N9.0bn (down 15% y/y) and we estimate ROAE of 6.9% in 2020e (FY 2019; 9.8%).
