Newsflow around the coronavirus is likely to remain hairy for some time yet. It pays therefore to remain well invested in gold.
Share markets might have been in recovery for the past couple of days but safe-haven asset gold has remained well bought, too. The yellow metal has sprinted back towards $1,650 per ounce this week, in fact, and could be set for a fresh challenge to the recent seven-year peaks around $50 higher.
Some encouraging data on Covid-19 infection rates boosted stock investor appetite at the start of the week. This showed the rate of spread slow in some parts of the world like Europe. Signs that Chinese society is getting back to the cut and thrust of normal life boosted sentiment as well.
Don’t think that we are over the hump, however. A record 828 UK citizens have lost their lives in the past 24 hours because of the coronavirus. And in the US, a daily high of 1,858 deaths has just been reported. Also today, the World Health Organisation’s regional director, Dr Hans Kluge, said that the progress Europe had made in battling the crisis was “extremely fragile.”
It’s clear, then, that demand for flight-to-safety assets could continue to boil for many months. It’s a theme that has already lit a fire under bullion demand since the start of 2020, as fresh World Gold Council (WGC) data today shows.
According to the body , global gold-backed exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and similar products added a whopping 298 tonnes of the shiny stuff during the first quarter. This was the largest inflow of new material for any quarter since 2016.
The value of these inflows amounted to $23bn, too, the highest quarterly figure ever.
More than half of the material (an enormous 151 tonnes) added during the first quarter flowed in during March when the coronavirus panic hit fever pitch. Total holdings now stand at record peaks of 3,185 tonnes.
Don’t just think of gold as a great play on current pandemic-related nervousness, though. Demand for the safe-haven asset and hard currency has in truth been flying for well over a year now, as WGC figures have repeatedly shown .
Global gold-backed ETF assets have swelled 56% during the past 12 months, reflecting rising fear over the world economy, major political troubles like Brexit and US-Chinese trade wars, and increasing inflationary concerns as central banks have slashed benchmark rates.
Some of the UK’s quoted bullion diggers have boomed in value on the back of this rampant investment interest. The FTSE 100‘s Polymetal, for one, is up 66% since this point in 2019. Meanwhile the FTSE 250’s Centamin has soared by almost half.
The prospect of more share price strength isn’t the only reason to buy these shares today, though. At current prices both still boast mighty dividend yields of 5.4% and 4.6% respectively.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Royston Wild has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
