Jordan Roy-Byrne Monday January 13, 2020 11:32
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
In recent days, the gold stocks have taken a  big step towards a significant breakout, which appears almost certain in 2020.
The gold and silver stocks had been leading  the respective metals and, as we posited a few weeks ago, could be unleashed  when the price correction in Gold and Silver ends.
The sharp move in Gold and Silver last week  suggests that the corrective low is in place.
The metals are currently battling with  resistance at $1520/oz and $18.00/oz and remain well above their corrective  lows around $1450/oz and $16.00/oz. A little consolidation or pullback would  not change our view that the recent lows will hold.
The upward thrust in the metals coincided with  the gold stocks advancing through their corrective resistance.
The HUI, which is only miners (no royalty  companies), broke past 220 and has reached a three-year high.
GDXJ is launched past $39 and is currently  testing three-year resistance.
GDX is lagging the other two indices, which is  a good sign. (We want miners and juniors to outperform royalty companies). It  is a mere 5% from what would be a nearly seven-year high.
One might think the miners are overbought  because they've trended higher over the past 15 months, and that has not  happened since 2010. One might also feel the future upside is limited.
However, when charting the past ten years, we  can see that the miners are not overbought and carry tremendous potential  moving forward.
Both GDX and GDXJ have a chance to surge  higher upon breaking out from these long bases. Upon a break past $31, GDX has  a measured upside target of $50. Upon a break past $50, GDXJ has a measured  upside target of $83.
I want to reiterate some things I wrote one  month ago when I publicly implored readers to buy now.
Everything is setting up for gold and silver  stocks and juniors for significant gains in 2020.
The breadth indicators are bullish, and the  miners are outperforming the metals. Also, the silver stocks are outperforming  the gold stocks, and the juniors are outperforming.
These are the things we want to see ahead of a  significant breakout.
Regardless of whether the break happens in the  next few weeks or the next few weeks, I am very confident in the outlook for  2020. The following 12 to 18 months have a chance to be extremely profitable in  this sector.
If you have not already, get positioned, buy  and weakness and hold.
We continue to focus on identifying and accumulating  the juniors with significant upside potential in 2020. To learn the stocks we  own and intend to buy that have 3x to 5x potential, consider learning more  about our premium service.
