Gold futures settled with a loss on Wednesday on the heels of 10 consecutive session gains. With no further escalation in the situation between Iran and the U.S. on Wednesday, "the period of calm resulted in profit taking" in the gold prices, said Chintan Karnani, chief market analyst at Insignia Consultants.  Traders will use sharp dips in prices to invest in gold, but it is "difficult to predict the short-term pace" of the rise in gold, he said. February gold gcg20 fell $14.10, or 0.9%, to settle at $1,560.20 an ounce. The contract had traded as high as $1,613.30, the highest intraday level since March 2013, according to FactSet data, after Iran fired missiles at bases in Iraq where U.S. troops are stationed, in retaliation for the U.S. killing of a top Iranian military commander.
Workhorse's stock set to snap record win streak, while BTIG analyst nearly doubles price target
Shares of Workhorse Group Inc.  are down 4% in Wednesday trading, putting them on track to snap a record 9-day winning streak in which they rocketed more than 4-fold (up 321%). Analyst Gregory Lewis at BTIG reiterated his buy rating on the electric van maker's stock but boosted his price target to $26, which is 77% above current levels, from $10. Lewis said a key takeaway from a call he hosted with management on Tuesday was that the company has "first-mover" advantage, which was solidified when the Series C van received final regulatory safety approvals, giving the company a 1-to-2-year head start on other electric vehicle (EV) last-mile delivery competitors. He said this should allow the company to secure a revolving credit facility, which would allow it to scale up operations. Lewis said a major potential catalyst could be a $6 billion to $8 billion contract from the U.S. Postal Service, in which bids are due later this month, and an announcement of the winner is expected later this year. He said another bullish factor is the optionality around the company's 10% equity stake in Lordstown Motors Corp., which unveiled its EV Endurance pickup truck last week. The stock has skyrocketed 881% over the past three months. Among its EV rivals, shares of Tesla Inc.  have run up 133% the past three months and Nikola Corp.  have climbed 537%, while the S&P 500  has gained 26%.
