Taking the plunge with gold stocks is one great way to play the metal price.
Petropavlovsk, for instance, is a gold producer whose share price has exploded 230% during the past year. It’s been swept higher by the yellow metal striking repeated multi-year peaks (the latest of which sits around $1,765 per ounce struck a month ago). Yet this Russian mining giant still provides excellent value for money, its shares trading on a forward price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio of 6 times.
City analysts here expect earnings to rocket 433% in 2020, but Petropavlovsk is no flash in the pan. Bottom-line growth is tipped to cool next year but an anticipated 41% advance isn’t to be sniffed at.
This FTSE 250 firm has been making the headlines in recent days. According to the Daily Telegraph (paywall) Petropavlovsk is exploring a merger with UGC, another Russian mining play, though the former has since dismissed claims that a deal is in the offing. Such an accord would certainly make a lot of strategic sense, so expect the rumour mill to crank back into gear before long.
Petropavlovsk has also been making news for other reasons. It announced in late May that it remained on course to pull between 620,000 ounces and 720,000 ounces of the shiny metal out of the ground in 2020. This follows the successful production of 186,200 ounces of gold in the first quarter of the year, up 73% on an annual basis.
The company’s bright earnings forecasts reflect the bright outlook for gold prices as well as the opening of its pressure oxidation facility (or ‘POX Hub’) in 2018. Output here is being steadily ramped up and will allow Petropavlovsk to fully exploit the rising gold price.
I am a seasoned freelance financial journalist reporting for a variety of publications across the globe. I was formerly a stocks and commodities reporter - and editor of
I am a seasoned freelance financial journalist reporting for a variety of publications across the globe. I was formerly a stocks and commodities reporter - and editor of print and online foreign currency coverage - at Shares Magazine, providing information and analysis for readers to make sound investment decisions in the UK and overseas. I was also a regular contributor to the magazine's extensive catalogue of bookazines and trading guides. Prior to this I was a reporter with the BaseMetals.com and TheBullionDesk.com newswires, breaking the latest news and providing in-depth analyses of the base and precious metals markets.
