Gold Price Futures (GC) Technical Analysis – Confirmation of Closing Price Reversal Top Could Shift Momentum.
Following the prolonged move up in terms of price and time, gold formed a closing price reversal top on Wednesday.
Gold futures settled lower after hitting a new contract high early in the session on Wednesday as investors booked profits in reaction to the selling of other asset classes as a global rise in coronavirus cases led a flight into the more liquid U.S. Dollar.
At 19:54 GMT, August Comex gold is trading $1776.70, down $5.30 or -0.30%. This is down from a high of $1796.10.
Although often called a “safe-haven” asset, gold is really an investment. Other factors that may have contributed to the market’s weakness were margin call selling related to the earlier plunge in global equity markets, higher demand for the true safe-haven Treasury bonds and a stronger U.S. Dollar against a basket of major currencies.
The main trend is up according to the daily swing chart. This was confirmed earlier in the session when buyers took out the previous contract high at $1789.00. The main trend will change to down on a trade through $1671.70.
The minor trend is also up. A trade through $1706.20 will change the minor trend to down. This will also shift momentum to the downside.
The minor range is $1671.70 to $1796.10. Its 50% level or pivot at $1733.90 is the nearest support. Since the main trend is up, buyers could show up on a test of this level.
Following the prolonged move up in terms of price and time, gold formed a closing price reversal top on Wednesday. The chart pattern doesn’t mean the trend is changing to down, but it does indicate the selling is greater than the buying at current price levels.
If confirmed on Thursday, the move could trigger the start of a 2 to 3 day correction, or at least a 50% correction of the last rally from $1671.70 to $1796.10. This would make $1733.90 the primary downside target.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
