Gold’s Back On The Retreat. Here’s Why It Should Rebound, And Why You Should Buy Gold Stocks
Gold values might be on the defensive again, but I reckon getting exposure to the safe-haven asset remains a great idea given the macroeconomic and geopolitical storm coming our way. Buying into some big-dividend-paying gold stocks would be a good plan, too.
As I say, bullion prices have retraced again in recent sessions as risk appetite has improved, and the hard currency has hurried back towards the $1,700 per ounce marker in end-of-week business. This is around 60 bucks away May’s fresh seven-year peaks.
The era of tremendous gold gains is far from over, however. Investor confidence might be slowly improving as quarantine measures are gradually rolled back in the US and Europe. But it remains extremely fragile and a fresh rush for flight-to-safety assets could materialise at any time. A second wave of Covid-19 infections has already hit parts of Asia like China and South Korea, and fears grow that a new spike could emerge in the West in the coming months.
Snapping up shares in Polymetal International and Centamin remains a sensible idea, then, at least in my opinion. These UK-quoted mining giants have rocketed in value over the past year in line with the booming bullion price. And at current prices they sport big dividend yields of around 5% for 2020.
Let’s leave the pandemic to one side, though. There are a number of other reasons why gold could turn higher again before long. At Friday’s press conference President Trump took a fresh swipe at China, another signal of deteriorating US-Chinese relations that threatens to derail last year’s progress on the trade talks. Rising civil unrest in the States, action that damaged stock market sentiment earlier this week, also continues to rumble on in the background.
At the same time, Brexit talks between the UK and the European Union are also showing signs of floundering. The trading block’s chief negotiator Michel Barnier on Friday denounced the lack of “significant progress” concerning trade discussions and accused London of backtracking on previous commitments. The threat of a ‘no deal’ Brexit seems to be growing, a development that would have far-reaching consequences for the global economy.
In recent days major central banks have also engaged in fresh rounds of money printing, providing an additional boost to gold’s price prospects. On Wednesday the European Central Bank said that it would expand its existing bond-buying plans considerably. It now intends to purchase $1.35 trillion worth of bonds, up a whopping $600 billion from its previous target.
With a global recession coming we can only expect more interest rate cuts and rounds of monetary stimulus to come, too, further undermining the value of paper money and thus bolstering demand for hard currencies like gold.
Data just released from the World Gold Council (WGC) shows how investment demand for the yellow metal has continued to rise in recent weeks. According to the body, total holdings in global exchange-traded products (ETFs) hit an all-time peak of 3,510 tonnes in May.
Bullion demand doesn’t just remain strong from individual investors, however. The WGC notes that central banks bought another 31.6 tonnes of the metal in April, just shy of the six-month average of 34.7 tonnes.
Bank purchases have cooled in recent weeks, but this represents in part the cessation of buying activity from Russia. On the whole, central banks continue to rise and recent comments from policymakers to the WGC suggest that buying levels should remain bubbly.
According to the council’s ‘2020 Central Bank Gold Reserve Survey’ released in mid-May, some 20% of banks intend to increase their reserves over the next 12 months. This compares with just 8% in the corresponding 2019 survey.
The stage looks set, then, for gold demand to remain strong in 2020. Investors can get access to this by buying the physical metal itself or by buying a bullion-backed vehicle like an ETF. But I’d rather own shares of gold miners like Polymetal International or Centamin. This strategy allows you to ride movements in the commodity price and to get hold of some juicy dividends, too.
I am a seasoned freelance financial journalist reporting for a variety of publications across the globe. I was formerly a stocks and commodities reporter - and editor of
I am a seasoned freelance financial journalist reporting for a variety of publications across the globe. I was formerly a stocks and commodities reporter - and editor of print and online foreign currency coverage - at Shares Magazine, providing information and analysis for readers to make sound investment decisions in the UK and overseas. I was also a regular contributor to the magazine's extensive catalogue of bookazines and trading guides. Prior to this I was a reporter with the BaseMetals.com and TheBullionDesk.com newswires, breaking the latest news and providing in-depth analyses of the base and precious metals markets.
