Guest(s): Peter Hug Global Trading Director, Kitco Metals
Gold prices could see 2011 highs of $1,920 an ounce or higher, said Peter Hug, global trading director of Kitco Metals, who noted that a full economic recovery won’t materialize until later next year.
Pandemic fears are still far from over, Hug said. In this interview he discusses the risks to equities that still linger in the economy, and should another correction take place for risk assets, gold may be pulled down with stocks before another rally were to take place. (show less)
Gold prices could see 2011 highs of $1,920 an ounce or higher, said Peter Hug, global trading director of Kitco Metals, who noted that a full economic recovery won’t materialize until later next year.
Pandemic fears are still far from over, Hug said. In this interview he discusses the risks to equities that still linger in the economy, and should another correction take place for risk assets, gold may be pulled down with stocks before another rally were to take ... (read more)
Your browser does not support inline frames or is currently configured not to display inline frames. Content can be viewed at actual source page: /news/video/latest?show=Kitco-NEWS.
The Kitco News team speaks to analysts and experts on the frontlines of the market to get the most up-to-date news on the economy. The show offers a well-rounded, timely view on big market moves and any major headlines that may affect financial assets. Coined – no pun intended – as the number one source of precious metals news, Kitco News is the leading provider of up-to-date price action in the precious metals space.
Disclaimer: The content on this website, including, without limitation, news, videos, interviews and commentaries, is provided by Kitco Metals Inc. ("Kitco") for informational purposes only and is not intended as any form of advice, whether legal, accounting, investment, financial or tax advice. Therefore, it cannot be relied upon as such. Should you require such advice, contact a licensed professional. The content provided herein is provided on an "as is" basis without any warranty of any kind, whether express or implied and your use of the information provided in said content is entirely at your own risk. In no event will Kitco be held liable for any indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages arising out of the use of the content on this website.
