Gold futures ended with just above the flat line on Monday after swinging between gains and losses, with traders looking for direction amid reports showing a surge in new coronavirus cases across the globe.
A somewhat steady dollar weighed on gold prices. The dollar index rose to 97.65 around mid afternoon, and was last seen at 97.56, up 0.13% from previous close.
Gold futures for August ended up $0.90 or less than 0.05% at $1,781.20 an ounce, after swinging between $1,776.50 and $1,790.40.
Silver futures for September shed $0.104 or about 0.6% at $18.064 an ounce, while Copper futures for September gained $0.135 or 0.5% to settle at $2.6925 per pound.
Many U.S. states are reportedly returning to previous restrictions following a surge in new coronavirus cases in the country last week. As many as 36 states have reported large number of new cases in the past week.
Infection rates remain on the rise in countries such as Brazil and India. Australia today reported 78 new coronavirus cases, the highest single-day rise since April. South Korea has reported new cases today.
The resurgence of the coronavirus outbreak and concerns that the Covid-19 has been badly underestimated curbed optimism for a swift recovery of the global economy.
According to a report from Johns Hopkins University, the number of coronavirus cases worldwide has surpassed 10 million, while the global death toll from the pandemic rose to more than 500,000.
Gold is also benefiting from the massive stimulus programs from central banks and the likelihood of negative real interest rates in the U.S.
Risk Disclaimer - By using this web site you agree to its terms and conditions.
All materials, including but not limited to articles, directories, photos, lists, etc., on this website are the sole property of ForexTV or the respective copyright holders and are intended for informational/educational purposes using hypothetical and sometimes anecdotal illustrations. The unauthorized use of any and all materials is prohibited and restricted by copyright law. Any use of materials on this site must be approved in advance by ForexTV.
Before deciding to invest in foreign exchange you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. The possibility exists that you could sustain a loss of some or all of your initial investment and therefore you should not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. You should be aware of all the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial advisor if you have any doubts. Forex (or FX or off-exchange foreign currency futures and options) trading involves substantial risk of loss and is not suitable for every investor. The value of currencies may fluctuate and investors may lose all or more than their original investments. Risks also include, but are not limited to, the potential for changing political and/or economic conditions that may substantially affect the price and/or liquidity of a currency. The impact of seasonal and geopolitical events is already factored into market prices. The leveraged nature of FX trading means that any market movement will have an equally proportional effect on your deposited funds and such may work against you as well as for you. Past results are no indication of future performance. Information contained this web site is intended for informational purposes only and was obtained from sources believed to be reliable. Information is in no way guaranteed. No guarantee of any kind is implied or possible where projections of future conditions are attempted.
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Accept Cookie Policy
