Gold is living up to its reputation as a haven during turbulent times.
The precious metal is up 10.7% this year, to $1,673 an ounce, a seven-year high . It could be on its way to testing its record high of $1,900, set in 2011.
Leading mining companies, such as Newmont (ticker: NEM) and Barrick Gold (GOLD), have bucked the recent slide in stocks and are each up about 15% this year. Bulls see more gains for bullion and the stocks, as investors around the world gravitate toward a sector in which most have little or no exposure.
“Gold is responding to systemic financial risk,” says Joe Foster, a manager of the undefined (INIVX). Foster argues that gold isn’t simply an inflation hedge, as it was during the 1970s, but benefits more broadly from financial, geopolitical, and economic dislocations, including the impact of Covid-19.
“The flows into gold are just getting started,” says Peter Grosskopf, chief executive of Sprott, a Toronto asset manager focused on precious metals. “Gold is now being seen as mandatory portfolio insurance and not a fringe asset.” He says that ownership of gold among institutional and retail investors remains low, with few even having Sprott’s recommended asset allocation of 5%.
Yielding nothing, gold often moves counter to the dollar and often does well when real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rates are negative, as they are now. The real rate, for instance, on the 10-year Treasury is negative 1%, with consumer prices rising at a 2% rate.
Gundlach, who has been bullish on gold since the metal stood at about $1,200 in 2018, sees a good chance that the Federal Reserve will cut short rates again—perhaps as soon as two weeks from now—following its surprise half-point cut this past week.
“The Fed is cutting rates, which is dollar-negative, and that means gold is heading higher,” Gundlach said. Barron’s has been bullish on gold since a September 2018 cover story .
There are many ways to play gold. Those who like gold, but don’t want the hassle of owning and storing it, can choose from many exchange-traded funds.
The largest bullion ETF is the $50 billion SPDR Gold Trust (GLD), followed by the iShares Gold Trust (IAU), which has a slightly lower fee at 0.25% annually, versus 0.40% for the SPDR Gold Trust. There is a liquid options market on that ETF. Money has steadily flowed into gold bullion ETFs globally in the past month, and the sector now totals almost $150 billion.
Mining-stock ETFs are led by VanEck Vectors Gold Miners (GDX) and VanEck Vectors Junior Gold Miners (GDXJ). Today, big mining companies are focused on delivering rising free cash flow, rather than increasing production regardless of cost.
Barrick is led by one of the industry’s best executives, Mark Bristow, a swashbuckling South African who had headed RandGold, which merged with Barrick in early 2019. Newmont, which merged with North America rival Goldcorp, has the largest market value in the sector and is the only gold stock in the S&P 500 index.
The industry, however, faces challenges, including the difficulty of finding new mines, as well as political and environmental opposition. Mining gold means crushing a ton of rock to obtain just a few grams of the metal.
This weekly email offers a full list of stories and other features in this week's magazine. Saturday mornings ET.
Even with the latest move, the VanEck Vectors Gold Miners ETF is still at only half of its 2011 peak, and many smaller mining stocks have trailed the largest companies.
“I don’t think the stocks have ever been cheaper,” VanEck’s Foster says. “They haven’t responded to the gold prices as much as in the past.”
Barrick and Newmont may not look cheap, with both trading at about 25 estimated 2020 earnings. But Foster looks at mining companies based on a different metric, annual pretax cash flow. He says the stocks trade for seven to eight times pretax cash flow, against a historical average of around 11.
The mining companies also offer “optionality”—meaning that their earnings rise at a multiple of an increase in gold prices.
At a time of growing financial risks and shrinking interest rates around the world, it is time for gold to find a place in investors’ portfolios.
Some gold ETFs, funds, and stocks for investors to weigh.
Gold Is Rising Amid the Swings in Stocks. Here’s Why the Rally Has Legs.
Gold is living up to its reputation as a haven during turbulent times.
