It was a nightlife made infamous by male G-string waiters, bikini models on parade, and even a highly controversial 'dwarf throwing' competition.
Nightclubs in Surfers Paradise became internationally renowned for beauty pageants, male revues and wild competitions
But a night out on the Gold Coast has changed drastically since the 1980s.
"It was quite a sexual scene," former managing editor of the Gold Coast Sun newspaper Rogin Taylor said.
"The guys dressed to the max and the girls dressed to the min.
But as the hospitality industry looks towards a coronavirus recovery, some within it are asking; could the past hold the key to future success?
The Gold Coast Sun regularly published photos of nightclub beauty pageants or bikini-clad women that photographers like Taylor would find at the beach.
Beauty pageants, like this one in 1989, were a regular feature in Gold Coast newspapers.
While many women were eager to be photographed, Taylor said: "You'd just never get away with printing stuff like that these days".
"It was just too sexual," he said.
"It was probably a little bit too much exposed, people thought we were taking advantage of the ladies of the day."
But the 'Miss Nightclub' beauty pageants were big winners for crowds, including at 'The Penthouse' which attracted contestants from around the world competing in events like 'lovely legs' and 'best bums'.
Even dressed of MASH's Corporal Klinger, Rogin Taylor took photos for the Gold Coast Sun newspaper.
The Penthouse's promotions manager, Gael Chudleigh, said such events were to "give people a reason to be there, not just to be there drinking till they're drunk".
"But I think today now, getting politically correct, and I'm not sure but I don't think the pageants in Australia are as popular as what they used to be."
Ms Chudleigh said bouncers used to take on a 'PR role' and were vastly different to the strictly licensed operators today.
Beauty pageants were a major attraction in the Gold Coast nightlife scene.
"I won't call them bouncers, our doorman, there was never this fighting carrying on," she said.
"If someone had a bit too much to drink, they talked them out of things and walked them out slowly."
"They'd have to jump a bar, pick up barrels of beer, carry them across the floor, light a girl's cigarette — but it was missing something," owner Vince Russo said.
Robbie Randell received international media attention for his part in The Penthouse's 'dwarf throwing' competition.
The Penthouse hired Robbie Randell to participate in the club's competitions in 1985.
"It just went worldwide, it was just crazy," Mr Russo said.
"I don't think you could get away with that now. See all the outcry back then, it'd be a lot worse now."
On top of stricter liquor licensing laws and longer operating hours, Mr Russo said the Gold Coast's growing population — around 350,000 more people since 1990 — changed "the small, sleepy little Gold Coast tourist town" of Surfers Paradise.
Surfers Paradise's reputation as the Gold Coast's entertainment precinct has changed in recent years.
Moreover, Mr Russo said new venues, including in other areas like Burleigh Heads, challenged the hegemony of Surfers Paradise's nightclubs.
"The clientele dispersed through other clubs so you lost that personal contact with a lot of customers," he said.
"The Gold Coast's nightclub scene is basically down to a few nights a week now, purely because there's no variety in what they offer.
"What do you do the other four, five nights a week?"
Vince Russo is still working in the Gold Coast's nightclub scene after 40 years.
Ms Chudleigh said these factors, combined with the rise of party drugs in the 1990s, gradually reduced demand for the "outrageous but innocent fun" the nightclubs offered.
"You could feel the mood changing," she said.
Surfers Paradise is a major nightlife precinct, but competition from suburbs further south has grown in recent years.
Billy James operated the well known Billy's Beach House bar throughout the 1980s and 90s, and now works with the Surfers Paradise Surf Club.
"[If] you had 50 people in your place every week, how would it look in a couple of months?" he said.
Billy James operated Billy's Beach House, saying the old nightlife scene was "just fantastic".
"That's the same with the Surfers entertainment precinct — it's gotta be upgraded, it's time."
He said connecting Surfer Paradise's entertainment hub with the $280 million Home of the Arts cultural precinct across the nearby Nerang River, could offer locals a richer experience.
"Locals have been neglected for a long time; it's been overlooked," he said.
"I know people who have lived here 30, 40 years, would not come into Surfers. Why? Why would they?"
