Gold is at a critical juncture. Prices could top or breakout within the next 48-hours. Our cycle work favors a top.
This week’s employment data could trigger a breakout in gold above $1800 or force an intermediate top. Expect increased volatility over the next 2-days.
To sustain a breakout, I’d need to see a daily finish in futures above $1820. Whereas closing below $1770 in the coming days would promote a top followed by a 1 to 3-month decline.
A favorite trick of manipulators is to get prices just above a resistance level and then wash the market with sell orders. I’m not sure if that will happen this time, but it’s a distinct possibility.
Our Gold Cycle Indicator reached 441 and is within maximum topping. The conditions are ripe for a cycle top. If prices peak, expect a decline in gold to $1450 – $1550.
Gold is testing the waters around $1800, and I think we will know by Thursday’s employment report if prices are breaking out or topping. It would take a close below $1770 to support a potential top. Whereas a daily close above $1820 would promote a breakout and a run to $1900.
Silver is also threatening to breakout to fresh highs, and a strong rally through $20.00 would be incredibly bullish. Prices are at a critical juncture – this is where price manipulators thrive, so be careful.
I think we will find out within the next 48-hours if gold and miners are breaking to new highs or if prices are topping. To support a breakout in GDX, I’d need to see a strong rally through the $38.00 level. Failing to break through $38.00, on significant volume, would keep the potential for an immediate top alive.
Juniors made a new closing high and are approaching the May high ($50.37). A strong move through the $51.00 – $52.00 area would support an upside breakout. Whereas slipping back below $45.00 would recommend a top.
AG Thorson is a registered CMT and expert in technical analysis. He believes we are in the final stages of a global debt super-cycle. For more information, please visit here .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
