Gold prices recovered some ground Thursday, settling modestly higher a day after falling to the lowest levels of the year, as governments and central banks moved to support the global economy, which has suffered under the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recent losses in global equities had triggered forced liquidation and a surge in the U.S. dollar.
“With all the extra stimulus from governments and central banks out there, it’s been a wild ride in debt markets recently, further feeding the frenzy in precious metal markets,” said Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at Oanda, in a market note, adding that gold has “continued to be volatile.”
Gold for April delivery US:GCJ20 on Comex settled at $1,479.30 an ounce, up $1.40, or 0.09% on Thursday,  after posting a decline of over 3% a day earlier. May US:SIK20 rose 36.2 cents, or 3.1%, to $12.134 an ounce following a loss of 5.8% on Wednesday.
Late Wednesday, the Federal Reserve announced a new Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, or MMLF, to assist money-market funds in meeting demands for redemptions by households and other investors.
Meanwhile, the European Central Bank launched a new program that would allow it to buy 750 billion euros ($820 billion) in government and private sector bonds as well as commercial paper. Separately, the Bank of England cut its bank rate by 15 basis points to 0.1%.
Against that backdrop, U.S. stock indexes were moving higher Thursday as gold futures settled, after another rout on Wednesday that was accompanied by selling across asset classes, including traditional havens like U.S. Treasurys, and a continued surge in demand for the U.S. dollar. The ICE U.S. Dollar Index DXY,
, a measure of the greenback against a basket of six major rivals, rose 1.3% Thursday after hitting a three-year high a day earlier.
“We do think that gold has seen consistent cushioning from those unwilling to give up on the idea of gold and silver ‘eventually’ getting safe haven buying,” analysts at Zaner Metals wrote in a daily note. “However for the time being, the primary safe haven instrument (at times the only safe haven instrument) has been the dollar and, therefore, we are highly suspicious of further gains in precious metals particularly and silver.”
Taking a look at the bigger picture, however, “investor panic on financial markets has resulted in a liquidation of open positions and a flight to the most liquid assets, such as U.S. Treasurys and cash in dollars and Japanese yen,” said Georgette Boele, precious metals analyst at ABN Amro, in a note.
Worries about physical demand as a result of a global slowdown are also a drag on gold, while a rise in the Cboe Volatility Index VIX,
to an all-time high and continued strength in the dollar set up a negative environment for the metal, she said.
‘We expect financial markets to remain in a risk off mode in the coming weeks and months, which should result in more dollar strength and gold price weakness,” she said.
Among other Comex metals, May copper US:HGK20 rose 1.6% to $2.1855 a pound. April platinum US:PLJ20 shed 1.4% to $596.80 an ounce, but June palladium US:PAM20 rose 7.7% to $1,529.40 an ounce.
New cases of COVID-19 in Chinese have settled and is “likely to have a very quick car purchase reaction,” R. Michael Jones, chief executive offer of Platinum Group Metals Ltd. PLG,
Palladium futures have fallen by about 38% month to date as worries about demand for the metals has suffered on the back of the economic slowdown tied to COVID-19.
