The Motley Fool Canada » Dividend Stocks » Gold Stocks Soar! Are These 2 Stocks Still Attractive Today?
Gold Stocks Soar! Are These 2 Stocks Still Attractive Today?
Kris Knutson | May 14, 2020 | More on: AEM FNV AEM FNV
For the last two years, I have been writing about adding gold to your portfolio to protect against economic uncertainty. These stocks have done very well, doubling or more over the past year. Continued strength in gold prices should continue to drive prices higher in the coming months or even years.
That is great for people who’ve invested early on, but it does not help curious investors decide if it is still a good time to invest in gold stocks. With prices shooting up, should you be buying today?
After a bit of a stumble in mid-March, gold stocks have taken off to an enormous degree. Some of the best names in the industry, such as Agnico Eagle Mines (TSX:AEM) (NYSE:AEM) and Franco-Nevada (TSX:FNV) (NYSE:FNV) have gone parabolic. Their stock prices are hitting new highs almost every day, it seems, lending credence to the gold trade.
There are fundamental reasons behind the flight to gold . Interest rates are getting slaughtered and governments are taking on debt at historic rates. Inflation might rear its ugly head again soon, and if it takes off, the price of gold might go flying with it. These are historic, unprecedented times, and no one has a clue how it will all play out.
Agnico and Franco-Nevada both have appeal in their business models. Agnico draws investors in due to the fact that the majority of its operations are in relatively stable geopolitical regions in Canada, the United States, and Mexico. It also has a low cost of production, which helps it capitalize on the increased price of gold.
Agnico also benefits from the fact that 97% of its revenue is from gold. Gold has had a much better run than silver, driving revenue higher. It also pays a small dividend of about 1.15% at the current share price, which is a nice bonus while you hold the stock.
Franco-Nevada is the gold standard in precious metals investing. The fact it is a gold royalty company limits its risk to operations. The company is not immune to mining disruption, but it has a diversified income stream that comes from multiple regions around the world.
Its debt-free balance sheet helped it to take advantage of opportunities when gold prices were low a few years ago. Now, when gold prices are high, Franco-Nevada is in the privileged position of cashing in on those investments.
The strategy also powers one of the best dividends in the gold sector. It is very small at less than 1%, but the dividend has grown steadily over the years. In fact, in the first quarter of 2020, Franco-Nevada increased the dividend by 4%.
I have to admit, I am more likely to be more of a seller at this point than a buyer. These stocks have performed very well after years of patience, so it is time to take some profits. Gold stocks can fall as fast as they go up, making them riskier at this point, as everyone is rushing in. If any stocks have doubled, I would certainly sell half to get my money back.
I certainly would not sell everything, since there is still a lot of geopolitical risk on the horizon. As a new investor, though, you could buy a little, perhaps half of what you intend to spend, and then wait for a pullback in gold stocks before adding more.
Renowned Canadian investor Iain Butler just named 10 stocks for Canadians to buy TODAY. So if you’re tired of reading about other people getting rich in the stock market, this might be a good day for you.
Because Motley Fool Canada is offering a full 65% off the list price of their top stock-picking service, plus a complete membership fee back guarantee on what you pay for the service. Simply click here to discover how you can take advantage of this.
Fool contributor Kris Knutson owns shares of Franco-Nevada and Agnico Eagle Mines Ltd.
Two New Stock Picks Every Month!
Not to alarm you, but you’re about to miss an important event.
Iain Butler and the Stock Advisor Canada team only publish their new “buy alerts” twice a month, and only to an exclusively small group.
This is your chance to get in early on what could prove to be very special investment advice.
Enter your email address below to get started now, and join the other thousands of Canadians who have already signed up for their chance to get the market-beating advice from Stock Advisor Canada.
I consent to receiving information from The Motley Fool via email, direct mail, and occasional special offer phone calls. I understand I can unsubscribe from these updates at any time. Please read the Privacy Statement and Terms of Service for more information.
