Gold futures end at lowest in 2 months, down nearly 4% for the week
Gold futures were sharply lower Friday , settling at their lowest in two months and losing nearly 4% for the week. A surprise monthly climb in U.S. jobs and a drop in the nation's unemployment rate led to a rally in the stock market, dulling demand for haven gold. "Given how this surprisingly strong jobs report may lower the chances of the Federal Reserve taking action, this does not bode too well for zero-yielding gold," said Lukman Otunuga, senior research analyst at FXTM. "If the dollar ends up appreciating on the absence of looser monetary policy and improving macroeconomic conditions in the United States, gold may weaken further." August gold GCQ20,
lost $44.40, or 2.6%, to settle at $1,683 an ounce. That was the lowest finish for a most-active contract since April 3. For the week, prices lost 3.9%, according to FactSet data.
BioNTech's  stock was halted and shares of Pfizer Inc.  gained 4.7% in trading on Wednesday morning after the companies said that all 24 participants in the Phase 1/2 clinical trial who received one of two lower doses of a COVID-19 vaccine candidate developed neutralizing antibodies. This data was shared by the companies and was also published in a preprint study, which means it has not been peer-reviewed. The study has 45 participants between the ages of 18 and 55 years old who were randomized and vaccinated; 24 of which received two rounds of two lower doses of the vaccine candidate. (Twelve participants received one high dose, and nine received two doses of the placebo.) The antibody findings are important because they indicate that the experimental vaccine can generate antibodies at the same level or higher than those seen in convalescent sera, which is collected from people who have recovered from COVID-19. There were no serious adverse events reported in the trial, although some reported pain in the area of the body where the investigational vaccine was administered. Pfizer said in a news release that additional data from this trial will inform the selection of the candidate - the companies are evaluating four COVID-19 vaccine candidates - and dosing level for the Phase 2b/3 study, which could begin this month, with up to 30,000 participants. Since the start of the year, BioNTech's stock is up 97.0%, shares of Pfizer are down 16.5%, and the S&P 500  is down 4.0%.
