A Gold Coast grandmother, who has been stranded in Malaysia since March, is pleading for help from consular officials who she says have not done enough to help her get home.
Maureen Clark has been stranded for four months, at her own cost, and every flight home she's booked has been cancelled
Maureen Clark said she had been "basically stuck" at a Langkawi resort since March 18, when Malaysia went into coronavirus lockdown.
Ms Clark said, while travel restrictions had since eased, she has still had difficulty finding reliable information on flights home.
"We've been trying to get the consulate, the High Commissioner of Australia in Malaysia, to give us confirmation, to let us know that we can get on that plane and it will be allowed to land at the destination we want to go to," she said.
A spokesperson for the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said, "the Australian Government has worked tirelessly to find options to return Australians stranded overseas with no access to commercial options".
"Across the world, the Australian Government continues to work with partners to identify flights for Australians, and assist with ticketing, airport transport, and domestic travel in foreign countries during lockdowns."
Ms Clark says tourists at Langkawi have only just been allowed to return to the water this week.
Ms Clark said she had attempted to book flights home on three occasions, but they were all cancelled at the last minute.
"To find a flight, we check every day and we also check the airlines that are landing in Queensland," she said.
"They're mostly cancelled or they're asking us to go via Hong Kong or Qatar, but then those flights get cancelled.
While some restrictions had eased in Malaysia, Ms Clark said the situation was still extremely stressful.
"It's just so hard," she said.
She had initially planned to return home on April 10.
The ABC understands that at least 13 commercial flights have departed Malaysia since April 2, with more than 650 Australians on board.
Coronavirus update: Follow all the latest news in our daily wrap.
Another Australian traveller in Penang, who asked to remain anonymous, told the ABC she had "no chance" of reaching flights out of Kuala Lumpur last month because she only received a maximum of 48 hours' notice from consular officials.
