The study authors installed nine monitoring plots in two central gold mining areas in Guyana from January to March 2016. They then checked back in on them between June and August 2017 to look for saplings, individual trees, or seedlings. They had to ultimately exclude nearly half of the plots because miners had already begun to re-mine them by 2017, which is another issue altogether and may have an even bigger impact on mercury concentrations.
The study found both high mercury and low nitrogen levels in the soil affect the ability for vegetation to regrow, with nitrogen a particularly good predictor. Compared to the control plots on both sites the team examined, the previously mined plots saw depleted nitrogen levels. Without the necessary nutrients, the forest struggled to grow. Where nitrogen levels were higher but biomass accumulation was still low compared to the control plots, the team noticed mercury levels were still high. However, the amount of mercury measured was much lower than what is found on active mining sites, which suggests that mercury is quickly leaching into the surrounding soils and waterways.
“Not only does this have serious consequences for our battle against global warming by limiting Amazonian forests’ ability to capture and store carbon, but there is also a larger implication of contaminating food sources especially for indigenous and local communities who rely on rivers,” Kalamandeen said in a statement .
The authors would like to expand this research into Brazil or Peru and do long-term monitoring to better understand the true extent of ecological damage as well as what it could mean for the climate. Natural carbon sinks like the Amazon are an invaluable resource in global efforts to pull carbon out of our atmosphere and prevent further global warming. However, the forest needs its own protection from deforestation for agriculture, mining, and other extractive activities. Otherwise, there will be no trees left to absorb our excess carbon emissions, and we’ll be left suffering.
