Gold's up, why are gold stocks down?
Lobo Tiggre Thursday March 05, 2020 12:18
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Wall Street indices fell off  another cliff this morning, officially entering correction territory. Gold, I’m  happy to say, rebounded at the same time, doing its job as a safe haven. But most  gold stocks are down… What’s wrong with this picture?
Nothing, actually. Not in terms  of normal market action.
Gold is a safe-haven  asset—gold stocks are not.
Imagine some mainstream  investors (not proud gold bugs) who happened to buy a few gold stocks to  diversify their portfolios. What do they do when panic sets in? They call their  brokers and tell them to get them out of all their risky stocks. The brokers do  as bid and sell everything they consider risky. That would definitely include  mining stocks… and gold stocks.
Everyone knows gold stocks  risky, after all—it’s probably programmed in to most computer trading  algorithms.
On top of this, there have to  be a lot of individual investors who were way out on margin, now getting margin  calls from their brokers. They are being forced to sell stocks even if they  don’t want to—like gold stocks while gold is rising.
And there will also be  investment funds facing redemptions from clients. That can force them to  liquidate large positions they would not otherwise even think of selling.
We saw all of this, and worse,  in 2008.
Now, I’m not convinced that  we’re in for another market crash like 2008.
But I have to say that it could  be so.
If ever there was a  ridiculously overextended rally riding for a fall, this was it.
Still, I think it’s  premature to say that we are, in fact, in the early stages of a 2008-style  market meltdown.
After all, Powell says the Fed  is ready and willing to support the economy—i.e. the stock market. The People’s  Bank of China (PBOC) is already unleashing more easy money. The European  Central Bank (ECB) and other central banks are on the same page.
Throwing money at a virus or  broken supply chains may not solve those problems, but… recent experience  tells us that it sure can boost share prices in the face of grim realities.
That said, we can’t ignore the  possibility that the global economic bubble has just hit its proverbial pin and  that no amount of money-printing will prevent its demise.
Headline-seeking gurus  will make bold predictions about this. I’m going to watch the data and wait  for a clear trend to develop. I feel no need to be the first to make a call  here. I feel a great need to get whatever calls I make right.
For now, the key datapoints  are gold holding well above $1,600 and gold stocks on sale.
What does all this tell me?
I don’t want to go all in buying everything on  my Shopping List during this dip. I think the powers that be will do everything  possible to prevent a crash, but they may fail. If so, everything—everything—will  be much cheaper in a couple months.
I do want to take profits on big wins. Cash  is King today. That, and Speculator’s Discipline are why I decided to realize a big  win I had in my portfolio.
But, as above the Fed, the ECB, the PBOC, and  other central banks may open the easy money spigots even wider, stopping the  panic out of stocks. That could cause gold and silver stocks to rebound  sharply, especially in a setting of higher gold and silver prices. So, I did  buy a first stake in the gold stock that’s been at the top my Shopping List all  year. (Which stock? That’s what subscribers to The  Independent Speculator pay to know.)
As I type, that stock I just  bought is even cheaper. No matter; I’m happy to be in before the next batch of  potentially very exciting drill results are released. If that happens while  gold stocks are rebounding, it could make for a very quick win. And if it does  turn out that we’re in for another major market crash, I think the stock will  do very well in the aftermath—as many of my picks did back in 2009.
Bottom line: don’t assume the  worst is inevitable, but plan for the possibility.
No one goes broke realizing  profits while they have them.
