Give me my free report!
Barrick Gold (TSX: ABX ,NYSE:GOLD) — Global gold miner Barrick Gold has issued several press releases on COVID-19. Its first on March 6 covered precautionary activities undertaken by the company, and in a March 20 follow up it said it was stepping up its emergency response plans. Barrick also said it has suspended non-essential business travel and work at non-essential projects.
A further March 24 update outlines plans for the Hemlo mine in Ontario, where non-essential businesses were ordered to close down on March 25. Since April began, Barrick has issued a slew of releases detailing how it is helping to prevent the spread of the virus in the areas where it operates.
Centerra Gold (TSX: CG ,OTC Pink:CAGDF) — Centerra Gold’s flagship properties are the Mount Milligan mine in Canada and the Kumtor Mine in the Kyrgyz Republic. It announced plans to significantly reduce manpower and temporarily reduce mill throughput at Mount Milligan for two weeks starting on April 6; it did the same at Öksüt project in Turkey on March 31.
Core Gold (TSXV: CGLD ,OTCQX:CGLDF) — Ecuador-focused Core Gold suspended operations at its Dynasty Goldfield mine on March 23. According to the company, the country’s COVID-19 situation saw a drastic change in the week leading up to the suspension, and Core Gold does not yet know when the mine will be back online. It is the firm’s only producing asset.
Dundee Precious Metals (TSX: DPM ,OTC Pink:DPMLF) — Dundee Precious Metals has experienced little impact from COVID-19. Its Chelopech and Ada Tepe mines in Bulgaria are operating normally , and while activities have been reduced at its Tsumeb smelter in Namibia, it is in line with guidance.
Eldorado Gold (TSX: ELD ,NYSE:EGO) — The company suspended operations at its Quebec-based Lamaque gold mine from March 23 to April 13 in accordance with restrictions put in place by the province’s government. Eldorado Gold announced on April 14 that Lamaque would be coming back online after mining was declared an essential business in the province. The temporary shutdown had only a “modest” impact on production in Q1.
Eldorado Gold has assets across three continents and is taking precautionary measures at its other sites. Aside from the measures mentioned, it drew down $150 million under its revolving credit facility on March 30 as a precaution.
Endeavour Mining (TSX: EDV ,OTCQX:EDVMF) — Operations have not been impacted by COVID-19, but an employee at the company’s Houndé mine in Burkina Faso did test positive for the virus on March 14.
Equinox Gold (TSX: EQX ,NYSEAMERICAN:EQX) — On March 27, Equinox Gold suspended activity at its RDM gold mine in Brazil for 15 days; the mill was set to keep processing lower-grade ore stockpiles.
In an April 2 update, the company said operations at RDM would be resuming , but noted that its Pilar gold mine in Brazil had been taken offline. Work is also suspended at Equinox’s Los Filos gold mine in Mexico until April 30. The company, which recently merged with Leagold Mining, has six mines in total and the rest continue to operate as usual.
Give me my free report!
Fiore Gold (TSXV: F ,OTCQB:FIOGF) — US-focused Fiore Gold said on March 19 that its Pan mine in Nevada was operating as normal ; on March 27, it announced plans to electronically host its annual general meeting. It continues to take other precautions to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
Galane Gold (TSXV: GG ,OTCQB:GGGOF) — Galane Gold is a producer with assets in South Africa and Botswana. On March 25, the company said it would have to halt work at its Galaxy operation in South Africa as the country has ordered all mines to be placed on care and maintenance until April 16.
Its Botswana-based Mupane operation will be affected too because most of its critical supplies come from South Africa. Mupane’s offtaker is also not able to ship its gold doré at this time.
Guyana Goldfields (TSX: GUY ,OTC Pink:GUYFF) — Underground development has been suspended at the company’s Aurora gold mine in Guyana due to a two week period of travel restrictions in and out of the country. Open-pit and processing plant operations are continuing.
Aurora is the company’s main asset; unrelated to coronavirus developments, an ore supply gap of four to six months is already expected this year.
Harte Gold (TSX: HRT ,OTC Pink:HRTFF) — Harte Gold bills itself as Ontario’s newest gold producer via its Sugar Zone mine. The company took the asset offline on March 30 and halted exploration; it did not indicate when operations may resume and said it would provide information on guidance by mid-April.
Kinross Gold (TSX: K ,NYSE:KGC) — Kinross Gold’s operations have not been affected by COVID-19, but as a precautionary measure the company drew down $750 million from its $1.5 billion revolving credit facility on March 20. The company also took preventive steps after an employee at its Toronto office tested positive for the virus in early March, and has withdrawn its production and cost guidance for 2020.
Lundin Gold (TSX: LUG ,OTC Pink:FTMNF) — On March 22, Lundin Gold suspended operations at the Ecuador-based Fruta del Norte gold mine. As mentioned, the COVID-19 situation escalated quickly in the nation — just four days before the shutdown at Fruta del Norte, the company said only that it was monitoring the situation . Fruta del Norte produced 28,678 ounces of gold last year; Lundin Gold has not indicated how the shutdown may impact output.
McEwen Mining (TSX: MUX ,NYSE:MUX) — McEwen Mining withdrew all of its production and cost guidance for the year on March 20.
As of April 14, the company’s assets were at various levels of operation — its Black Fox mine in Ontario was back up and running after a two week suspension; mining had restarted at the Argentina-based San Jose mine after a nationwide quarantine; operations were temporarily scaled back at its Gold Bar mine in Nevada; and activity was limited at its El Gallo project in Mexico.
Medusa Mining (ASX: MML ) — After announcing on April 9 that it had put its Co-O gold mine in the Philippines on care and maintenance , Medusa Mining said on April 15 that the property would be allowed to operate under certain conditions. Co-O is the company’s main asset, although it also has exploration projects in both the Philippines and Australia.
Which Expert Called $1500 Gold?
Download your FREE conference report from the Denver Gold Forum conference!
Give me my free report!
Monument Mining (TSXV: MMY ) — Per a Movement Control Order from the Malaysian government, Monument Mining suspended operations at its Selinsing gold mine on March 18; the suspension was originally expected to last until March 31, but was extended first until April 14 and then until April 28 .
Selinsing is the company’s only producing asset, and it has written to the government to request that it be allowed to keep operating.
New Gold (TSX: NGD ,NYSEAMERICAN:NGD) — On March 20, New Gold suspended work at its Rainy River gold- silver mine in Ontario to allow workers to self-isolate for 14 days. The mine is near the US border, and the self-isolation period has been recommended by Canada’s federal and provincial authorities for those who travel outside of the country.
Aside from Rainy River, the company also holds the New Afton gold- copper mine in BC and the Blackwater gold-silver project in the same province. They have not been impacted by COVID-19.
Newmont (TSX: NGT ,NYSE:NEM) — Newmont said on March 17 that it would have to ramp down mining operations at its Yanacocha gold mine in Peru due to government restrictions put in place due to COVID-19. The asset accounts for about 3 percent of the company’s 2020 attributable gold production outlook.
Since then, major gold producer Newmont has withdrawn its full-year guidance for 2020 and placed three more operations on care and maintenance: Musselwhite (Ontario), Eléonore (Quebec) and Cerro Negro (Argentina). On April 1, it also announced plans to ramp down operations at its Peñasquito mine in Mexico due to a government mandate.
OceanaGold (TSX: OGC ,ASX:OGC,OTC Pink:OCANF) — Underground development at the company’s Martha underground mine, located at its Waihi gold operation in New Zealand, will be put on hold for four weeks starting on March 25. The pause is due to a government-mandated suspension of non-essential businesses. OceanaGold said it will be working with the country to see if its Macraes goldfield, New Zealand’s largest gold producer, can be exempt from the suspension.
Premier Gold Mines (TSX: PG ,OTC Pink:PIRGF) — North America-focused Premier Gold Mines suspended exploration at its Hasaga gold project in Ontario for at least two weeks on March 25. Then, on April 1, it said it was in the final steps of putting its Mercedes mine in Mexico on care and maintenance until April 30, per government instructions.
The company’s Nevada operation has not been affected by the coronavirus, but it has withdrawn its 2020 production guidance.
