Gold’s Rally Still Has Legs. Here’s Why, According to One Analyst.
Gold, the commodity, looks set for a multiyear closing high on Monday. J.P. Morgan’s Dominic O’Kane says global central bank liquidity injections, and a weaker U.S. dollar are two reasons to be bullish.
The price of gold continued its historic run on Monday as investors turn to the precious metal amid unprecedented uncertainty surrounding Covid-19, and efforts to combat it.
Front-month gold was trading at $1,765 per troy ounce Monday morning. That would be its highest close since October 2012, according to Dow Jones market data. The VanEck Vectors Gold Miners exchange-traded fund (ticker: GDX) jumped 5% to $35.25. Stock of gold-mining industry leaders Newmont (NEM) and Barrick Gold (GOLD) were both up more than 3% Monday.
J.P. Morgan analyst Dominic O’Kane upgraded American depositary receipts of South African gold producer Gold Fields (GFI) on Sunday to Buy from Neutral, and raised the target price to $11.30 from $6.50. He noted that strategists at J.P. Morgan are bullish in gold, which he says can benefit from global central bank liquidity injections, a weaker U.S. dollar, and moves to hedge against deflation and inflationary risks. O’Kane covers metals, mining, and steel in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. Newmont and Barrick are both based in North America.
“Synchronised central bank stimulus and unconventional monetary policy measures such as helicopter money are resulting in significant expansions of global government debt, increasing the risk to fiat currency valuations,” O’Kane wrote. “Negative real rates for currently create an opportunity cost of NOT holding gold versus conventional safe haven government debt. Fiscal stimulus measures also increases long-term inflationary risks for economies.”
He notes that among the nations with the highest fiscal stimulus announcements as a percentage of 2019 gross domestic product, are the U.S. at 11.7%, Japan at 19%, and the U.K. at 16%.
“Expansion of government balance sheets, plus increased money supply among reserve currencies raises a risk of future fiat currency devaluation in our view, which enhance gold’s store of value credentials,” O’Kane wrote.
Barron’s has been bullish on gold since a cover story in September  2018. We also liked Newmont and Barrick in January 2019 , and they were two our most successful picks for the year. Newmont stock returned 42.4% from publication through the end of the year, while Barrick stock returned 59%. We pointed to further upside for gold as the Covid-19 pandemic unfolded in March.
So far this year, Barrick and Newmonth stock are both up more than 30%, as are Gold Fields ADRs.
Gold’s Rally Still Has Legs. Here’s Why, According to One Analyst.
The price of gold continued its historic run on Monday as investors turn to the precious metal amid unprecedented uncertainty surrounding Covid-19, and efforts to combat it.
