Gold futures tallied a fourth straight session climb Tuesday, gaining support from concerns about weakness in the global economy, as well as in corporate quarterly results, due to the cessation of business activity intended to stem the spread of COVID-19.
Some weakness in the U.S. dollar also provided a lift to bullion, even as stocks, which tend to move in the opposite direction to haven metals, rose.
“Major corporate earnings reports are now starting to be released, which will show the early impact of the Covid-19 pandemic, and be a sobering reminder of the tough economic times at present,” wrote Jim Wyckoff, senior analyst at Kitco, in a Tuesday research note.
JPMorgan Chase & Co. reported a 69% drop in net income, and a sharp increase in reserves against the prospect of losses among its loans.
Gold for June delivery US:GCM20 on Comex climbed by $7.50, or 0.4%, to settle at $1,768.90 an ounce after hitting an intraday peak at $1,788.80. Tuesday’s settlement and peak were the highest values for a most-active contract since October 2012, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Ryan Giannotto, director of research at GraniteShares, which offers the GraniteShares Gold Trust BAR,
“This latest facility on behalf of the Fed, not only allows the central bank to purchase junk bonds, but it is the largest money printing event in human history,” Giannotto told MarketWatch. “These developments catalyzed gold’s close above $1,700 [and ounce Monday], and the metal is rallying further…the first taste of corporate earnings.”
Gains for precious metals came even as the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
rose in Tuesday dealings on the back of signs the spread of the virus has peaked in Europe and is leveling off in the U.S.
Commodity investors also may be focusing on a dim outlook for the economy from the International Monetary Fund , which released its most recent update. The new forecast sees the global economy contracting at a 3% annual rate this year followed by a 5.8% rebound in 2021, representing a deeper recession than during the 2007-09 recession.
“Much worse growth outcomes are possible and maybe even likely,” wrote Gita Gopinath, the IMF’s top economist, in a Tuesday statement.
A softer dollar was buttressing gold as well, commodity experts said. A weaker dollar can make commodities priced in the currency more attractive to users of other monetary units. The U.S. dollar was down 0.4% against a basket of a half dozen rivals, as gauged by the ICE U.S. Dollar Index DXY,
Elsewhere in Comex, the most-active May contract for silver US:SIK20 gained 59.3 cents, or 3.8%, to $16.13 an ounce. May copper US:HGK20 also rose 1.2% to $2.3295 a pound.
tacked on 9.3% to $819.70 an ounce and June palladium US:PAM20 fell 0.7% to $2,185.40 an ounce.
Certainly, the platinum group metals markets are “benefiting from news of ongoing mine closures in South Africa, but we get the sense that some big picture safe haven buying has entered the equation this week,” analysts at Zaner Metals wrote in a Tuesday market update.
Nasdaq notches record close to start July after Fed minutes, but Dow slumps as Boeing, Exxon shares weigh
The Nasdaq Composite on Wednesday closed at a record high to kick off July but the Dow industrials lagged behind, after minutes from the Federal Reserve's meeting  last month indicated that policy makers would aim to provide more explicit guidance on the outlook for benchmark interest rates amid the coronavirus pandemic. Improving data on employment and the manufacturing sector buttressed markets in the first trading day of the month even though about a dozen American states have paused or halted plans to allow more businesses to reopen. The Nasdaq  ended up 1% at around 10,155, finishing handily above its last record close on June 23 as gains in electric-vehicle maker Tesla Inc. , Netflix Inc.  and Facebook Inc.  helped to propel the technology-laden benchmark. The S&P 500 index  finished up 0.5% at 3,116, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average  closed down 0.3%, pressured lower by declines in components Boeing Co.  and  Exxon Mobil . Early in the session, stocks got a boost from another Dow component Pfizer Inc. , which reported positive results from its clinical trial for a COVID-19 vaccine candidate. An upbeat report on manufacturing activity from the Institute for Supply Management and a private-sector report from ADP also helped to stoke the buying mood on Wall Street, ahead of a highly anticipated nonfarm-payrolls report due on Thursday due to the July 4th holiday in the U.S.
