But it’s also possible that some speculators have looked at the coronavirus evidence so far and compared it with the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak which killed more than 800 people worldwide in 2002 and 2003.
Deadly as SARS was, a range of measures such as quarantining patients proved effective. The SARS lessons, even if China was slow to react in the early days, are likely to deliver a similar result, which could be a factor in early-bird investors moving back into the industrial metals market just as public health news worsens.
Putting a financial cost on the coronavirus at this stage of its spread is all but impossible, but a number of investment banks have tried to assess the impact on different industries.
Police officers wearing face masks stand guard at a road block outside the Lady MacLehose Holiday ... [+] Village, a temporary quarantine camp, in Hong Kong.
UBS has published opinions on airlines, airports and cruise lines, with a focus on those with cruise ships proposing to visit Chinese ports.
Citi noted the potential negative effect on a number of business sectors, but also found a few winners, such as 3M, which has “a strong respiratory franchise” within its healthcare division.
Macquarie compared the latest health scare with SARS, and while acknowledging the selloff in industrial metals—which cut prices by between 5% and 15% in 2003—it wasn’t long before prices regained lost ground and shot higher.
Differences with the latest virus outbreak include uncertainty about the spread of the infection and the dramatic elevation of China’s control of the market in industrial metals.
Back in 2002, China consumed around 20% of the major metals. Today, it consumes closer to 50%, so a decline in Chinese demand will have a bigger impact.
“With China now out for the New Year holidays, market volumes will fall and so precluding much worse developments in the next few days, [markets will] more likely begin to stabilize after last week’s shocks,” Macquarie said.
“If the SARS history is any guide, the prevention of wide international spread, identification of the strain and a slowdown in new cases will be the key to confidence returning and recovery,” Macquarie added.
“To the first and second points (prevention and identification) the earlier sharing of information between countries leading to travel restrictions and monitoring, and China’s identification and release of the virus’ genome sequence are better early outcomes than in 2003.”
Looking back at the reaction of metal markets in 2003, Macquarie said that a casual observer analyzing the whole year would probably not pay attention to the afflicted period given the super-rally that surged through the second half of 2003.
Any metal-market reaction to this latest viral infection is likely to be less than that seen after SARS because back then China was still in the early stages of its industrial revolution.
But there are lessons from SARS and the most important is that financial markets have a time-proven way of recovering from shocks.
I studied geology in the 1960s and worked for a small mining company before getting a start in journalism during the 1969 nickel boom. Since then I've covered repeated
I studied geology in the 1960s and worked for a small mining company before getting a start in journalism during the 1969 nickel boom. Since then I've covered repeated booms and busts in the commodities sector for a passing parade of newspapers, magazines and website. I am also a regular contributor to radio and television news services in Australia.
