The Motley Fool Canada » Investing » Got $5,000? Buy This Bulletproof Stock Before a 2nd Market Crash
Joey Frenette | June 29, 2020 | More on: GOLD ABX
When investors as a whole start to discount the profound risk brought forth by the socio-economic disaster that is the COVID-19 pandemic, that is when you should be thinking about taking a bit of profit off the table before Mr. Market has a chance to catch everybody by surprise with a second market crash.
As we witnessed in the latter part of February, discounting highly uncertain and ominous exogenous events can have disastrous consequences for one’s portfolio. Despite the unprecedented relief rally off those March lows, little progress has been made to eliminate the insidious coronavirus, with Arizona, Florida, and Texas becoming new hotbeds for what appears to be a second wave of COVID-19 infections.
As reopening rollbacks become the primary driver of stocks over the coming weeks and months, and as the coronavirus grips the markets again, there’s a real chance that we could be headed for another market crash. Regardless, investors should seek to adopt a risk-parity portfolio, so they’re not left holding the bag with the most at-risk names should market momentum reverse violently on news of accelerating coronavirus infections.
This piece will have a look at two stocks to pick up right now if you’ve neglected the defensive portion of your portfolio, or if your portfolio depends on the timely elimination of the coronavirus.
Gold stocks are like an insurance policy for your portfolio. When the broader market melts down, and there’s a liquidity crunch amid a panic-driven rush to the sidelines, gold stocks can hold their own. They’re one of the few stocks trading in the green in a market-wide sea of red.
Like insurance, however, investors should limit their exposure to gold and gold miners, as they tend to get left behind when it comes time for the broader markets to bounce back. Moreover, whenever gold stocks are already in high demand (likely to weigh down the defensive portion of a portfolio), gold stocks can be pricey, and they can leave you in a tough spot if the market decides to meltup rather than meltdown, possibly on further U.S. Fed interaction.
Barrick Gold (TSX:ABX) (NYSE:GOLD) is my preferred gold mining stock for Canadian investors looking to hedge their bets. The company has faced a minimal impact on its operations from COVID-19 and is in a spot to rally as pandemic uncertainties continue to mount.
Unlike most other gold miners, Barrick is sufficiently diversified and can better handle wild swings in gold prices relative to many other gold miners that tend to be more sensitive to the underlying commodity. Gold isn’t just a great way to help your portfolio lower its beta (ABX sports a 0.33 beta), but it’s also a great inflation risk that pays a 1.1% dividend yield (it’s not much, but for a gold miner, it’s something!).
Many analysts see gold prices hitting $1,800 amid these unprecedented uncertainties. And while such heights are entirely plausible, investors would still be wise to limit their exposure to any gold miner, as gold prices are substantially higher than the mid-cycle price point of around $1,200-1,300. That leaves overexposed gold investors exposed to a severe downside should uncertainties suddenly fade in a good news event such as the arrival of an effective COVID-19 vaccine.
Do hedge your bets, but don’t go all-in on gold stocks, because there is risk in buying too much insurance, especially if prices are on the rich side.
For most investors, I’d recommend having gold comprise no more than 5% of a portfolio (maybe 10% if you’re extremely bearish and nervous about volatility). For many investors, that means putting $5,000 of your $100,000 portfolio to work in a name like Barrick Gold.
If you're looking for opportunities in this uncertain market, I'd encourage you to consider the following:
Motley Fool Canada's market-beating team has just released a brand-new FREE report revealing 5 "dirt cheap" stocks that you can buy today for under $49 a share.
Our team thinks these 5 stocks are critically undervalued, but more importantly, could potentially make Canadian investors who act quickly a fortune.
Don't miss out! Simply click the link below to grab your free copy and discover all 5 of these stocks now.
Fool contributor Joey Frenette has no position in any of the stocks mentioned.
Two New Stock Picks Every Month!
Not to alarm you, but you’re about to miss an important event.
Iain Butler and the Stock Advisor Canada team only publish their new “buy alerts” twice a month, and only to an exclusively small group.
This is your chance to get in early on what could prove to be very special investment advice.
Enter your email address below to get started now, and join the other thousands of Canadians who have already signed up for their chance to get the market-beating advice from Stock Advisor Canada.
I consent to receiving information from The Motley Fool via email, direct mail, and occasional special offer phone calls. I understand I can unsubscribe from these updates at any time. Please read the Privacy Statement and Terms of Service for more information.
