Have Insiders Been Buying Warrior Gold Inc. (CVE:WAR) Shares This Year?
It is not uncommon to see companies perform well in the years after insiders buy shares. Unfortunately, there are also plenty of examples of share prices declining precipitously after insiders have sold shares. So we'll take a look at whether insiders have been buying or selling shares in Warrior Gold Inc. ( CVE:WAR ).
It is perfectly legal for company insiders, including board members, to buy and sell stock in a company. However, such insiders must disclose their trading activities, and not trade on inside information.
Insider transactions are not the most important thing when it comes to long-term investing. But equally, we would consider it foolish to ignore insider transactions altogether. For example, a Columbia University study found that 'insiders are more likely to engage in open market purchases of their own company’s stock when the firm is about to reveal new agreements with customers and suppliers'.
President Danièle Spethmann made the biggest insider purchase in the last 12 months. That single transaction was for CA$100k worth of shares at a price of CA$0.10 each. That means that even when the share price was higher than CA$0.07 (the recent price), an insider wanted to purchase shares. While their view may have changed since the purchase was made, this does at least suggest they have had confidence in the company's future. To us, it's very important to consider the price insiders pay for shares. It is generally more encouraging if they paid above the current price, as it suggests they saw value, even at higher levels.
Warrior Gold insiders may have bought shares in the last year, but they didn't sell any. They paid about CA$0.086 on average. These transactions suggest that insiders have considered the current price attractive. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. By clicking on the graph below, you can see the precise details of each insider transaction!
There are always plenty of stocks that insiders are buying. So if that suits your style you could check each stock one by one or you could take a look at this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
Have Warrior Gold Insiders Traded Recently?
There was only a small bit of insider buying, worth CA$6.5k, in the last three months. Overall, we don't think these recent trades are particularly informative, one way or the other.
I like to look at how many shares insiders own in a company, to help inform my view of how aligned they are with insiders. We usually like to see fairly high levels of insider ownership. From our data, it seems that Warrior Gold insiders own 8.1% of the company, worth about CA$385k. We do generally prefer see higher levels of insider ownership.
So What Do The Warrior Gold Insider Transactions Indicate?
Insider purchases may have been minimal, in the last three months, but there was no selling at all. That said, the purchases were not large. However, our analysis of transactions over the last year is heartening. While we have no worries about the insider transactions, we'd be more comfortable if they owned more Warrior Gold stock. In addition to knowing about insider transactions going on, it's beneficial to identify the risks facing Warrior Gold. At Simply Wall St, we've found that Warrior Gold has 4 warning signs (2 are a bit concerning!) that deserve your attention before going any further with your analysis.
But note: Warrior Gold may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
