Have Marathon Gold Corporation (TSE:MOZ) Insiders Been Selling Their Stock?
Simply Wall St June 15, 2020
We wouldn’t blame Marathon Gold Corporation ( TSE:MOZ ) shareholders if they were a little worried about the fact that Phillip Walford, the Non-Executive Director recently netted about CA$800k selling shares at an average price of CA$1.60. However, it’s crucial to note that they remain very much invested in the stock and that sale only reduced their holding by 9.1%.
In fact, the recent sale by Phillip Walford was the biggest sale of Marathon Gold shares made by an insider individual in the last twelve months, according to our records. So what is clear is that an insider saw fit to sell at around the current price of CA$1.58. We generally don’t like to see insider selling, but the lower the sale price, the more it concerns us. In this case, the big sale took place at around the current price, so it’s not too bad (but it’s still not a positive).
In the last twelve months insiders purchased 375.33k shares for CA$508k. On the other hand they divested 1270800 shares, for CA$1.9m. In total, Marathon Gold insiders sold more than they bought over the last year. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
I will like Marathon Gold better if I see some big insider buys. While we wait, check out this free list of growing companies with considerable, recent, insider buying.
I like to look at how many shares insiders own in a company, to help inform my view of how aligned they are with insiders. We usually like to see fairly high levels of insider ownership. It appears that Marathon Gold insiders own 4.8% of the company, worth about CA$15m. This level of insider ownership is good but just short of being particularly stand-out. It certainly does suggest a reasonable degree of alignment.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Marathon Gold Insiders?
Unfortunately, there has been more insider selling of Marathon Gold stock, than buying, in the last three months. Despite some insider buying, the longer term picture doesn’t make us feel much more positive. Insider ownership isn’t particularly high, so this analysis makes us cautious about the company. We’d think twice before buying! So while it’s helpful to know what insiders are doing in terms of buying or selling, it’s also helpful to know the risks that a particular company is facing. For example – Marathon Gold has 4 warning signs we think you should be aware of.
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
