Hipo Resources (HIP) has signed a binding Heads of Agreement to acquire a stake in Zamia Resources, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Zamia Metals
Zamia Resources owns four exploration permits in Queensland's Drummond Basin, including the historical open pit Belyando and Lucky Break gold mines
The company will be able to bump its stake in Zamia Resources up to 70 per cent through additional expenditure, on terms yet to be agreed
In addition, Hipo will issue Zamia Metals 40 million Hipo shares, subject to a 12-month voluntary escrow
To fund work at the projects, Hipo also intends to undertake a $720,000 placement for which it has received firm commitments
Hipo Resources (HIP) has signed a binding Heads of Agreement to acquire a stake in Zamia Resources, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Zamia Metals.
Zamia Resources owns four exploration permits in Queensland's Drummond Basin, including the historical open pit Belyando and Lucky Break gold mines.
Hipo will pay $25,000 for due diligence exclusivity and if completed satisfactorily, the company will pay $75,000 and issue Zamia Metals 40 million Hipo shares, subject to a 12-month voluntary escrow.
The company will be able to earn an initial 30 per cent in Zamia Resources by spending $425,000 on work at the projects within six months and a further 20 per cent by spending another $1 million within the following 12 months.
Hipo will then be able to bump its stake in Zamia Resources up to 70 per cent through additional expenditure, on terms yet to be agreed.
Hipo Executive Chairman Maurice Feilich said the company is looking forward to kick-starting exploration at the projects.
“This is an excellent transaction for Hipo and we are confident we can deliver significant value to shareholders through a multi-faceted exploration program in and around the dormant open pit mines and the potential mineralisation extensions along strike and at depth," Maurice said.
"Of equal appeal are the very compelling high-value targets that Zamia’s experienced team have defined across the roughly 115 square kilometres of exploration licenses; they hold outstanding exploration potential," he noted.
In order to pay for the transaction, early exploration and permitting, Hipo also intends to undertake a $720,000 placement. The company has received firm commitments for the placement, under which it would issue 60 million shares for 1.2 cents each.
Hipo Resources' share price climbed 46.7 per cent today on the news to close at 2.2 cents per share.
