Give me my free report!
Gay also said South Africa, Peru, Canada and Mexico have seen the most impact at a country level. He added, “China, gold’s top producer , was highly impacted as well, especially within the artisan and small-scale mining, but due to lacking official records it will take some time to estimate the real impact.”
Coronavirus restrictions first prompted gold-mining companies to curtail operations or close them down entirely in about mid-March, but initially many were reluctant to quantify what these decisions would mean for their production.
Since then, some large miners, including Agnico Eagle Mines (TSX: AEM ,NYSE:AEM), Kinross Gold (TSX: K ,NYSE:KGC) and Newmont (TSX: NGT ,NYSE:NEM), and have withdrawn their guidance for the year; most, however, have not issued new numbers.
“Considering the situation is changing on daily basis, it is extremely difficult to estimate the impact on gold output, and every forecast is likely to be updated frequently,” said Gay.
Webb made a similar comment, saying, “Companies will need lockdown periods to come to an end before they can quantify the impact as there is a lot of uncertainty around this at the moment.”
Kirilenko, Gay and Webb all said that they don’t think gold companies’ Q1 results will give a clear picture of how COVID-19 has impacted their production. Instead, they believe Q2 reports will offer illumination.
“Most shutdowns were announced at the end of March, so the impact on output may not be reflected in the stats released by the miners for Q1, but should definitely be seen in July, after they publish reports for the second quarter,” said Kirilenko. He added that market watchers will then also have a clearer sense of the impact on how hard global gold production levels have been hit.
Gay offered an early idea of COVID-19’s impact on worldwide gold production for the year, saying that preliminary forecasting from Refinitiv, whose data is sourced from its recently revamped Mining Production Database, shows that gold output will be impacted by about 1 percent, which equates to a potential loss of around 1 million ounces. For context, he said that over the last five years, year-on-year production increases have averaged about 2.5 percent.
Give me my free report!
COVID-19’s impact on gold production is far from certain, but what seems even less clear is how a slowdown in gold exploration could impact the space in the future. Alongside miners slowed or shut mines, some gold juniors have reduced or cut programs, or taken other preventive measures.
“Difficult to quantify this,” said Webb when asked how much of the world’s gold exploration has been halted or slowed by the virus. “Although there will certainly have been a slowdown due to lockdown policies and also a lack of funding due to the financial turmoil caused by the crisis.”
In response to the same question, Gay said that at least for now gold projects have been “minimally impacted,” though again he pointed out that it’s also important to consider operations that produce gold as a co-product or a by-product.
“On the copper front, one of the most relevant events was the suspension of contractors’ contracts for the Los Pelambres expansion project in Chile (also an important gold producer),” he said. Gay added that a more accurate picture will begin to emerge when companies discuss their growth CAPEX.
In the long term, Gay expects to see a decrease in annual gold production — although the coronavirus is not the only reason for that. He noted that big gold miners have long neglected exploration investment, with growth CAPEX among the 15 largest gold miners declining about 20 percent from 2014 to 2019. The drop was largely because of investor pressure for higher company returns in the short term.
Refinitiv anticipates that year-on-year gold production will start dropping from 2023 — if that happens it would be the first output decrease since 2006.
“If current gold prices maintain similar levels on a medium to long term, more reserves and resources might become available (most of the companies consider a gold price of US$1,200 per ounce when estimating their reserves), therefore acting as ‘buffer’ for this production drop, but it might not be enough to keep growing annual production.”
Overall, the message was to wait and see — it’s still too soon to know for sure how gold production will be impacted this year, and for gold exploration the answers may be even further out.
Don’t forget to follow us @INN_Resource for real-time updates!
Securities Disclosure: I, Charlotte McLeod, hold no direct investment interest in any company mentioned in this article.
Editorial Disclosure: The Investing News Network does not guarantee the accuracy or thoroughness of the information reported in the interviews it conducts. The opinions expressed in these interviews do not reflect the opinions of the Investing News Network and do not constitute investment advice. All readers are encouraged to perform their own due diligence.
Which Expert Called $1500 Gold?
Download your FREE conference report from the Denver Gold Forum conference!
Get the latest information about companies associated with Gold Investing Delivered directly to your inbox.
