Insider Buying: The Red Lake Gold Inc. (CSE:RGLD) Executive Chairman Just Bought 30% More Shares
Simply Wall St June 11, 2020
Potential Red Lake Gold Inc. ( CSE:RGLD ) shareholders may wish to note that the Executive Chairman, Ryan Kalt, recently bought CA$143k worth of stock, paying CA$0.10 for each share. That’s a very solid buy in our book, and increased their holding by a noteworthy 30%.
Notably, that recent purchase by Executive Chairman Ryan Kalt was not the only time they bought Red Lake Gold shares this year. Earlier in the year, they paid CA$0.15 per share in a CA$150k purchase. We do like to see buying, but this purchase was made at well below the current price of CA$0.32. Because the shares were purchased at a lower price, this particular buy doesn’t tell us much about how insiders feel about the current share price.
Ryan Kalt purchased 4.83m shares over the year. The average price per share was CA$0.14. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. By clicking on the graph below, you can see the precise details of each insider transaction!
Red Lake Gold is not the only stock insiders are buying. So take a peek at this free list of growing companies with insider buying.
Does Red Lake Gold Boast High Insider Ownership?
I like to look at how many shares insiders own in a company, to help inform my view of how aligned they are with insiders. Usually, the higher the insider ownership, the more likely it is that insiders will be incentivised to build the company for the long term. It appears that Red Lake Gold insiders own 38% of the company, worth about CA$3.4m. We’ve certainly seen higher levels of insider ownership elsewhere, but these holdings are enough to suggest alignment between insiders and the other shareholders.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Red Lake Gold Insiders?
It’s certainly positive to see the recent insider purchase. And the longer term insider transactions also give us confidence. But we don’t feel the same about the fact the company is making losses. Given that insiders also own a fair bit of Red Lake Gold we think they are probably pretty confident of a bright future. So while it’s helpful to know what insiders are doing in terms of buying or selling, it’s also helpful to know the risks that a particular company is facing. To help with this, we’ve discovered 4 warning signs (2 are concerning!) that you ought to be aware of before buying any shares in Red Lake Gold.
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
