BMW has done it again - turning their luxury cars even more premium. The automaker announced the Golden Thunder Edition for its 8 Series cars. The edition vehicles will be produced at the BMW plant in Dingolfing starting from September 2020.
Here are all the details...
Buyers can choose between two shades of black - including the Sapphire Black Metallic or Frozen Black Metallic. The car will also have high-gloss black trim, completely shaking off the chrome in the standard model. Even the brake callipers are covered in black.
The car gets gold accents on both bumpers, on the rocker panels, on the mirror caps and on the Coupe variant’s rear spoiler.
Inside, the car has an all-Merino black leather upholstery with aluminium mesh-effect gold trim on the centre console. A dedicated badge is stitched into the front headrests.
BMW has also added a gear selector made with CraftedClarity glass, and a surround-sound system made by Bowers & Wilkins, to give the interiors a more premium feel. The M sports package is always a standard feature in these vehicles.
The Edition Golden Thunder is available for all model variants of the new BMW 8 Series Coupé, the new BMW 8 Series Convertible and the new BMW 8 Series Gran Coupé – from the BMW 840i and the BMW 840d xDrive through to the BMW M850i xDrive.
Luxury sports cars of the BMW 8 Series are raised to collector’s item status by means of exclusive BMW Individual design and equipment features.
Tata Power | BUY | Target Price: Rs 55
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
