Insider Buying: The First Mining Gold Corp. (TSE:FF) CEO & Director Just Bought CA$440k Worth Of Shares
Simply Wall St March 8, 2020
Potential First Mining Gold Corp. ( TSE:FF ) shareholders may wish to note that the CEO & Director, Daniel Wilton, recently bought CA$440k worth of stock, paying CA$0.22 for each share. We reckon that’s a good sign, especially since the purchase boosted their holding by 80%.
In fact, the recent purchase by CEO & Director Daniel Wilton was not their only acquisition of First Mining Gold shares this year. Earlier in the year, they paid CA$0.27 per share in a CA$540k purchase. That means that an insider was happy to buy shares at above the current price of CA$0.20. Their view may have changed since then, but at least it shows they felt optimistic at the time. To us, it’s very important to consider the price insiders pay for shares is very important. As a general rule, we feel more positive about a stock if insiders have bought shares at above current prices, because that suggests they viewed the stock as good value, even at a higher price.
Happily, we note that in the last year insiders paid CA$1.5m for 5.99m shares. But insiders sold 37000 shares worth CA$8.3k. Overall, First Mining Gold insiders were net buyers last year. They paid about CA$0.24 on average. These transactions suggest that insiders have considered the current price attractive. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
There are always plenty of stocks that insiders are buying. So if that suits your style you could check each stock one by one or you could take a look at this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
Looking at the total insider shareholdings in a company can help to inform your view of whether they are well aligned with common shareholders. A high insider ownership often makes company leadership more mindful of shareholder interests. From looking at our data, insiders own CA$3.4m worth of First Mining Gold stock, about 2.8% of the company. We prefer to see high levels of insider ownership.
So What Do The First Mining Gold Insider Transactions Indicate?
It is good to see recent purchasing. And an analysis of the transactions over the last year also gives us confidence. However, we note that the company didn’t make a profit over the last twelve months, which makes us cautious. On this analysis the only slight negative we see is the fairly low (overall) insider ownership; their transactions suggest that they are quite positive on First Mining Gold stock. So these insider transactions can help us build a thesis about the stock, but it’s also worthwhile knowing the risks facing this company. When we did our research, we found 5 warning signs for First Mining Gold (1 is potentially serious!) that we believe deserve your full attention.
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
