For the remainder of 2020, INV Metals will focus on permitting efforts for Loma Larga, which are led by Dr. Mark Thorpe, who has over 25 years of experience in environmental, social, governance and permitting. With the completion of the updated FS, the Company will be primarily focused on obtaining the key environmental permits, along with an Investment Protection Agreement, to allow for the Board of Directors to make a development decision on Loma Larga. The permitting process will include the completion and submission of the EIS which will incorporate relevant technical information from the FS where appropriate, along with community consultation efforts and communication programs. The submission of the EIS is expected prior to the end of Q2/2020 but may be subject to delays as a result of current and/or any future restrictions which may be in place due to the COVID-19 global pandemic.
The Company will concurrently focus its efforts to secure funding for the development of Loma Larga. Management will explore a range of various financing options which may be available to the Company, including Project debt, by-product streams, off take arrangements and/or equity financing.
The Company is committed to maintain and build upon its strong Environmental, Social and Governance  (“ESG”) programs and to engage in meaningful consultation with our stakeholders. INV Metals is committed to developing the Loma Larga gold-silver-copper project in an environmentally sustainable manner and to executing using best-in-class standards within the global mining industry. The Loma Larga underground mine is an environmentally focused mine, supported by key technical benefits such as the use of tailings in paste backfill, a filtered tailings disposal method, the shipment of concentrates, and no cyanide to be used in the process plant.
The Company recognizes that the stewardship of water is a critical issue and concern among all stakeholders and therefore INV Metals has designed its water management practices using accepted best-in-class standards. All water that comes into contact with mined material will be treated prior to release. Natural runoff will be diverted around the mine infrastructure to the extent possible. Contact water, including water that must be withdrawn from the underground mine to maintain a safe working environment, will be collected and used for mineral processing. Excess contact water, not used in mineral processing, will be treated prior to discharge in the receiving environment. Water management, including water treatment, will continue during the closure phase until discharge from the site meets established discharge criteria without active treatment.
Increased controls and monitoring of tailings facilities should be incorporated into the engineering design for all future mining projects and as a result, the design of the filtered tailings facility incorporates the current guidance from well known experts related to the technical stability of the design. The tailings storage facility will store filtered tailings within a lined and contained area to minimize the amount of impounded water, allow for the diversion of surface water, and the collection of contact water for treatment. Approximately 6.5 million tonnes of plant tailings are expected to be placed underground as paste backfill, with 5.5 million tonnes remaining on surface in the tailings storage facility which will be covered at closure with liners and rehabilitated with indigenous plants and grasses. The Company has a nursery on site which hosts, along with animals for educational purposes, over 50,000 indigenous trees and shrubs for planting during rehabilitation.
The Company has worked together with the local governments and community groups for over 15 years to deliver impactful programs that are generated in conjunction with the participants. The employees of INV Metals are dedicated to and passionate about our relationships with our local stakeholders. We look forward to the consultation process to welcome informed and transparent dialogue with our communities and other important stakeholders.
The Loma Larga gold-silver-copper deposit is classified as a high sulphidation epithermal system and alteration is characterized by multiphase injections of hydrothermal fluids strongly controlled by both structure and stratigraphy. The deposit is a flat lying to gently western dipping (less than ten degrees), north-south striking, cigar shaped body, which has a strike length of approximately 1,600 metres north-south by 120 metres to 400 metres east-west and up to 60 metres thick, beginning approximately 120 metres below surface.
RPA Inc. (“RPA”) estimated Mineral Resources for Loma Larga using all drill hole data available as of September 1, 2018. No further exploration drilling has occurred at Loma Larga since that date. The current Mineral Resource estimate is based on an underground mining scenario and is reported inclusive of Mineral Reserves. Using a US$55/t Net Smelter Return (“NSR”) cut-off value, Mineral Resources effective as of March 31, 2020 are summarized in the following table. The Mineral Resource estimate was updated using estimates of $1,650 per ounce of gold, $21 per ounce silver, and $3.75 per pound copper, an increase in price from the 2019 FS which used $1,450 per ounce gold and $3.50 per pound copper, and a decrease from $22 per ounce silver. The effect of the increase in gold prices was an increase in Measured and Indicated Resources from 19.8 million tonnes to 24.1 million tonnes and a corresponding decrease in the overall gold grade from 4.25 g/t to 3.76 g/t.
Table 4 – Loma Larga Mineral Resource Estimate, Effective as of March 31, 2020
