Gold was one of the highest-performing investments in 2019. The precious metal started the year at US$1,286 per ounce and ended it at $1,525 — about an 18.5% gain in a 12-month span. Although gold’s run cooled down in the last quarter of 2019, there’s plenty of cause for optimism for gold investors in 2020.
Today, the yellow metal is a blue-chip investment amid rising global tensions, the preeminence of nationalist parties worldwide and widespread market uncertainty following the longest-ever market expansion period. As the short-run debt cycle moves toward a recessionary period, we can expect gold to perform well through 2020 and 2021.
Wondering if you should invest in gold or precious metals in 2020? My firm specializes in precious metal assets; together, let’s examine the facts, weigh the downside and analyze the current market conditions to see whether this asset is worth adding to your portfolio in the year ahead.
When the international financial system is threatened by geopolitical instability, gold provides an excellent anchor for your wealth. During times of economic crisis, gold and other precious metals retain their value exceptionally well and often appreciate in value. In other words, unstable geopolitical times present lucrative opportunities for gold investors.
Perhaps the most intriguing geopolitical development for gold investors is the China-U.S. trade war. The ongoing trade war between China and the U.S. has brought the American manufacturing sector to a 10-year low . Even if relations thaw with the implementation of the Phase One trade agreement announced on December 12, the U.S. manufacturing sector will still suffer from poor corporate investment and an uncertain policy environment.
In the event that the U.S. manufacturing sector continues to decline, we may see a recession in the U.S. for the first time in over a decade. Although this would spell disaster for the U.S. equities market, a recession is a positive growth indicator for gold investors due to the negative correlation trend that gold has shared with U.S. stocks.
Whether an investor should purchase shares in a gold-backed exchange-traded fund (ETF) or physical gold bullion or coinage is largely a matter of tax strategy and personal preference. No matter which option you choose, the capital gains of both asset types are taxed as collectibles (28%) if held for longer than a year. If held for less than one year, they are taxed as ordinary income, which usually incurs a much higher debt burden for investors.
Whereas ETFs benefit from superior liquidity and convenience, bullion allows investors to have direct ownership over the commodity. Although shares in gold-backed ETFs rose sharply in 2019, including in large investment funds such as SPDR Gold Shares (GLD), we predict physical bullion sales will rebound dramatically in 2020 due to counterparty risk that bullion banks present.
Precious metals–backed ETFs vault their holdings in bullion banks, which can accrue massive losses for investors if they default or declare bankruptcy. For this reason, savvy investors should consider putting their money in physical gold bullion that they store themselves as a hedge against counterparty risk.
A credit crunch (like the one seen in 2008) may cause all sellable assets, including gold, to drop in value. Look no further than the late-2000s economic crash for proof. In early 2008, the price of gold fell by about 25% but subsequently recovered in the following months. Through 2010 and 2011, the price of gold continued to fall amid relative gains made by the U.S. dollar.
During the late-2000s financial crisis, U.S. Treasuries were a safe haven investment amid massive selloffs in most other asset classes. Since U.S. Treasuries can only be purchased with U.S. dollars, the dollar performed comparatively well to the euro and other hard currencies. The eventual monetary response from U.S. central bankers saw a massive injection of U.S. dollars in the market, which caused steep dollar depreciation and gold appreciation through 2012.
In sum, gold is a source of funding for margin calls that are made on depreciating assets during economic crises. This effect causes a forced sale of gold across the market, which deflates the price. Later in the economic cycle, as monetary policy and interest rates mitigate the contracting market conditions, gold begins to rebound beyond its initial price point.
It’s also worth noting that gold has an uncertain track record during times of hyperinflation. Gold should only be valued relative to your home currency. In countries such as Venezuela, which is experiencing one of the worst cases of hyperinflation in history, the cost of gold has not kept up with inflation.
For centuries, gold has been regarded as having a negative correlation with equities and a positive correlation with inflation. In other words, gold is a safe-haven investment during times of economic recession and a worthwhile store of value during expansionary periods. Although gold currently sits at a seven-year high, all market indicators point toward continued growth in the short run.
Expect a moderately bullish year for gold in 2020 as it likely breaks beyond the $1,700 barrier and toward all-time highs in the year following. Gold remains an invaluable long-run inflation hedge that provides a strong foundation for any risk-intolerant portfolio. Allocating 5% to 15% of your portfolio to precious metals — with the majority in gold — could be one of the best defenses against an economic downturn and an uncertain geopolitical arena in 2020.
The information provided here is not investment, tax or financial advice. You should consult with a licensed professional for advice concerning your specific situation.
Young Entrepreneur Council (YEC) is an invitation-only, fee-based organization comprised of the world's most successful entrepreneurs 45 and younger. YEC members…
Young Entrepreneur Council (YEC) is an invitation-only, fee-based organization comprised of the world's most successful entrepreneurs 45 and younger. YEC members represent nearly every industry, generate billions of dollars in revenue each year and have created tens of thousands of jobs. Learn more at yec.co. Questions about an article? Email feedback@yec.co .
