Gold touched $1,800 for the first time in eight years.
Many of the largest gold mining stocks — Barrick, Newmont, FrancoNevada, Wheaton Precious — are up 60% to 90% in the past year.
That means they’re moving 2X to 3X higher than the “record setting” NASDAQ.
And this is only the beginning.
Now that gold is at $1,800, a few new factors come into play…
First, from a technical perspective, if they can hold this level then gold prices can quickly move toward all-time highs north of $1,900 per ounce. ( Gold prices are of course already at all-time highs in many other currencies that don’t have a Fed to fight.)
Second, gold is starting to gain mainstream attention and recognition.
As stock markets roar back from the coronavirus-led rout, advisers to the world’s wealthy are urging them to hold more gold, questioning the strength of the rally and the long-term impact of global central banks’ cash splurge.
Before the COVID-19 pandemic, most private banks recommended their clients hold none or just a tiny amount of gold.
Now some are channelling up to 10% of their clients’ portfolios into the yellow metal as the massive central bank stimulus reduces bond yields - making non-yielding gold more attractive — and raises the risk of inflation that would devalue other assets and currencies.
While gold prices have already risen 14% since the start of the year to $1,730 an ounce, many private bankers bet that gold — a hedge for both inflation and deflation — has further to run.
The mainstream media recognizing gold as a hedge against both inflation and deflation?
And look at how much these banks are recommending their clients hold in gold: 10%!
Nine private banks spoken to by Reuters, which collectively oversee around $6 trillion in assets for the world’s ultra-rich, said they had advised clients to increase their allocation to gold.
Now, let’s do some rough math.
Ten percent of $6 trillion is $600 billion.
And that’s just from nine banks.
You'll Never Be On The Inside!
So join Outsider Club today for FREE. You'll learn how to take control of your finances, manage your own investments, and beat "the system" on your own terms. Become a member today, and get our latest free report: "The 5 Best Ways to Buy Gold."
After getting your report, you’ll begin receiving the Outsider Club e-Letter, delivered to your inbox daily.
Now consider that the total combined market capitalization of the top 25 global mining companies is not much more than that — something like $800 billion.
When money comes rushing into the gold space like is starting to happen… there are simply only so many places for it to go.
And that’s why you get the drastic upward price moves in gold stocks. Or what Doug Casey has famously referred to as “trying to siphon the Hoover Dam through a garden hose.”
That’s the sort of rush we’ve been calling for. And that’s what is happening now.
Just in the past three months, many gold stocks we have financed or recommended are up 100% to 500%.
We expect new all-time highs in gold prices.
And we expect multiples of the returns we’ve already earned.
Call it like you see it,
Nick is the founder and president of the Outsider Club , and the investment director of the thousands-strong stock advisories, Early Advantage and Wall Street's Underground Profits . He also heads Nick’s Notebook , a private placement and alert service that has raised tens of millions of dollars of investment capital for resource, energy, cannabis, and medical technology companies. Co-author of two best-selling investment books, including Energy Investing for Dummies, his insights have been shared on news programs and in magazines and newspapers around the world. For more on Nick, take a look at his editor's page .
You'll Never Be On the Inside!
So, join Outsider Club today for FREE!  You'll learn how to take control of your finances, manage your own investments, and beat "the system" on your own terms.  Become a member today, and get our latest FREE report: "Three Big Profit Opportunities in Solar"!
After getting your report, you’ll begin receiving the Outsider Club e-Letter, delivered to your inbox daily.
Coronavirus is causing tremendous panic leading to a shakeup in global markets.
But rather than panic from the pandemic, you can profit.
In our latest report, "Superbugs and Your Wallet: 3 Ways to Inoculate Your Portfolio" we discuss the various ways people are duped by certain health care stocks and offer much more legitimate options and strategies.
We even include the 3 best stocks to repair your portfolio in dire times like these.  Become an Outsider today, and receive this report FREE!
Sign up to receive your free report. After signing up, you'll begin receiving the Outsider Club e-letter daily.
1 It’s Time to Get Your Gold On 2 Smart Money Is Playing the Long... 3 Corporate Socialism at Its Boldest 4 Mr. Dines: Begin With Understanding... 5 Sneak Peek: Everybody’s a Winner
1 It’s Time to Get Your Gold On 2 Smart Money Is Playing the Long... 3 Corporate Socialism at Its Boldest 4 Mr. Dines: Begin With Understanding... 5 Sneak Peek: Everybody’s a Winner
