Junior Gold Stocks Creating Massive Opportunity for Investors!
An Immediate Stock Alert is Being Called On:
Now more than ever everyone is looking for “it”, yet most can’t find “it” & by “it” we’re referring to OPPORTUNITY IN THE STOCK MARKET!
The global pandemic that is COVID-19 is causing a worldwide economic fallout not seen since the financial crisis of 2008, which was the largest economic downturn since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
The 2008 financial crisis left a wake of destruction and scorched earth but out of the ashes rose massive opportunity for those that had the foresight to think ahead and ultimately realize the opportunity in front of them and as a result REAL WEALTH WAS BUILT!
When Presenting a True Wealth-Building Opportunity in Times of Uncertainty There is 1 Key Factor to Consider:
What are the “recession-proof” industries, meaning if the world continues to fall into uncertainty what industries will provide investors with the biggest opportunity to thrive?
The answer and PRIMARY EXAMPLE of a “recession-proof” industry is the GOLD & MINING SECTOR!
During the 2008 financial crisis companies like Barrick Gold Corporation saw massive gains. From January 1, 2007, to January 1, 2008 (NYSE: GOLD) saw its price per share increase over 73% when it went from $29.61 to $51.44 (see chart below)
The Primary Rule for Investing is to Buy Low and Sell High.
Junior stocks like IMC International Mining Corp ( OTC: IMIMF ) ( CSE: IMCX ) provide investors with the opportunity to buy into a company in a recession-proof industry while the company is still within its exploration & development phase.
There is, of course, inherent risk when investing at the beginning stage of any company, but there is also the potential of GREAT REWARD!
On The Topic of “Risk vs Reward” The Top Investor of All Time Warren Buffet has Said 3 Key Things:
“Whether we’re talking about socks or stocks, I like buying quality merchandise when it is marked down.”
IMC International Mining Corp ( OTC: IMIMF ) ( CSE: IMCX ) is a junior exploration and development company. It is focused on creating shareholder value through the advancements of its assets which include the Cathedral Property in Northern British Columbia and the Bullard Pass Property in Arizona. The Company continues to look for further assets in North & South America as it increases its asset portfolio. International Mining will utilize its heavily experienced management team to evaluate assets that provide shareholder value.
IMC International Mining Corp ( OTC: IMIMF ) ( CSE: IMCX ) Conference Call from 4/7/2020
IMC International Mining ( CSE: IMCX ) ( OTC: IMIMF ) closed on a multi-million dollar acquisition of a company with 100% ownership to a property in one of the most prolific areas for gold discovery in the world.
The company’s new Chairman, Greg Hawkins has over 50 years of industry expertise and has been part of at least 4 major mining company acquisitions collectively worth more than $2 billion in deal size.
The current global financial climate is perfect for a bull run in gold. Precious metals thrive in an environment that has low/no interest, slowing world economies, weaker currencies, and low Treasury yields.
The full ramifications of Coronavirus are still yet to be realized and likely still months away from showing the true economic impact. That could mean a long runway for gold’s next bull run.
Small-cap gold stocks perform the best during gold rallies and given the latest developments by IMC International Mining ( CSE: IMCX ) ( OTC: IMIMF ), it warrants a closer look by the market.
Disclaimer: Pursuant to an agreement between Midam Ventures LLC and IMC International Mining Corp. (CSE: IMCX) (IMIMF), Midam has been paid $200,000 for a period from January 7, 2020, to February 14, 2020. Midam has been paid an additional $200,000 and extended its period of coverage to March 14, 2020. Midam has been paid an additional $200,000 and extended its period of coverage to July 9, 2020. We may buy or sell additional shares of IMC International Mining Corp.(CSE: IMCX) (IMIMF) in the open market at any time, including before, during or after the Website and Information, to provide public dissemination of favorable Information about IMC International Mining Corp. (CSE: IMCX) (IMIMF). Full disclaimer here .
Midam Ventures, LLC | (305) 306-3854 | 1501 Venera Ave, Coral Gables, FL 33146 | news@pennystocks.com
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
