The COVID-19 pandemic has generated renewed interest in short-time work programs—the state-sponsored work-sharing schemes aimed at saving jobs. Kurzarbeit, Germany’s short-time work program, is widely considered the gold standard of such programs.
stable during the global financial crisis. But this crisis is likely
to be even more profound, and affect more sectors of the economy. In an
interview with IMF Country Focus, the IMF’s
likely to be effective this time around.
What are the main features of Kurzarbeit?
employees’ working hours instead of laying them off. Under Kurzarbeit, the
worked, while receiving full pay for the hours worked. So, for example, a
Kurzarbeit is, in many ways, an excellent crisis management tool. In a deep
demand. Since workers do not lose their jobs, they have less incentive to
save on a precautionary basis. And companies retain firm-specific human
capital, while avoiding the costly process of separation, re-hiring, and
It is also worth mentioning that Kurzarbeit is an addition to private working-hour flexibility arrangements. Employees in
recessions with no effect on paychecks. Firms are allowed to use Kurzarbeit only when working time accounts are exhausted, which helps contain fiscal
Are there any disadvantages to the program?
normal times could potentially reduce labor market flexibility, keeping
workers in jobs that eventually need to disappear, and increasing the
To avoid such outcomes, and limit the fiscal costs of the program, Kurzarbeit entails some co-financing components. In particular, the
owed on the reduced working hours. This cost-sharing element ensures that Kurzarbeit is not the first and only resort of employers who need to reduce
balance between providing relief during deep recessions, while not
introducing too much rigidity into labor markets during normal times.
How effective was Kurzarbeit during the global financial crisis?
Work-sharing was an important factor explaining this success. We estimate
that about a third of the reduction in working time per employee was due to Kurzarbeit, with the rest explained by other margins of flexibility (such
Other factors might have also been at play. It could be argued, for
the global financial crisis was partly the result of earlier wage moderation, and a high
degree of specialization of manufacturing workers, both of which made
labor hoarding affordable for employers during the global financial crisis.
demand, with stable labor income supporting private consumption, and
reducing the need for precautionary savings. This opened the way to a rapid
How is Kurzarbeit faring during the COVID-19 pandemic?
economy than the global financial crisis. The global financial crisis mainly affected the manufacturing sector via
collapsing import demand from trade partners. In contrast, the confinement
closures in many sectors. Therefore, several changes to Kurzarbeit’s features have been implemented or announced, with a view to making the
scheme temporarily more attractive to employers and employees alike.
is a prolonged reduction in work hours. The replacement rate, starting at
60 percent for the first three months, will increase to 70 percent during
the 4th to 6th months, and further to 80 percent from
account balances before claiming Kurzarbeit has also been suspended.
percent of their workers in order to be eligible for Kurzarbeit; the
threshold has been lowered to 10 percent. Together, these changes make the
scheme much more attractive to employers.
What is your overall assessment?
employers, and more generous to employees, while expanding coverage across
sectors and across different types of jobs. This will come at an increased
fiscal cost, but one that is well worth paying.
than the global financial crisis which, for Germany, was mainly a manufacturing story. In
sectors—do not make social security contributions, and are therefore not
They are among those likely to suffer the most from the sharp recession. To
avoid potentially large social costs, the government should consider
