Richard Cox Wednesday April 29, 2020 11:39
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Financial market chaos continues with broad  volatility levels shaking out traders on both sides of the trade. Perhaps the  most surprising events of the last several weeks have been the declines in gold  and silver, which are both assets that tend to see strong buying activity  during times of risk and heightened uncertainty.
At the same time, even the most bearish  precious metals traders must concede that successful asset class selection in  this market environment has been a nearly impossible task. Everything, from  tech stocks, to high-yielding currencies, to consumer staples have been sold  with incredible levels of trading volume that have deeply impacted markets. In  other words, there really has been nowhere to hide as the “rush to cash” has  defined market trends for the past several weeks.
Recent support levels have been established in  GOLD/USD near the  $1,445.90 level. This  level was the critical “line in the sand” that I mentioned in my last article  and it would appear that this price zone has established a high level of  accuracy. Based on my Ichimoku price analysis shown above, gold has moved back  into the Kumo (the cloud indicator), which suggests sideways consolidation  rather than further declines. Additionally, the CCI indicator reading is turning  up from oversold territory and this is a strong confirmation of the initial  trading signals.
If we move into the 4-hour charts, we can see  that gold has very good potential to break through the Kumo cloud structure.  Short-term resistance levels have been broken in a consistent fashion, so an  upside break of the Kumo would be a highly bullish event.
Pivot point readings on the stochastic  oscillator charts continue to suggest bullish follow-through, however, we are  also in overbought territory on the short-term charts and this means we will  probably see a period of consolidation before we are able to see a strong surge  higher in the price of gold.
It might be more encouraging, however, to look  at the technical analysis framework that is currently unfolding in SILVER/USD.  At first glance, it would seem as though the price structure is largely similar  to what we initially saw in GOLD/USD. But this is where the magic of technical  analysis indicators can really offer us a strong dose of objectivity because we  can see that silver markets have not yet broken through the cloud base.
Daily charts for silver also show the extent  to which prices collapse in the rising market volatility. Since nothing has  changed in the fundamental picture for silver in the last six weeks, these  declines indicate extreme price moves that are likely to reverse quite sharply  if the Ichimoku cloud structure on the 4-hour charts can be overcome.
Of course, we are still outside of the  long-term highs that characterized the precious metals markets after the  financial crisis more than a decade ago. This means there is clear scope for a  dramatic surge in silver prices that could surpass any rallies in gold without  much difficulty.
In my view, what is most likely is that a  primary breakout in the price of gold could actually work as a precursor to  similar moves in the other major metals (particularly in silver and platinum).  If this turns out to be the case, sentiment could turn quickly for the entire  metals complex and even influence price moves in the gold mining stock sector.  As a result, the total moves could be widespread throughout market sectors and  silver still has the potential to outperform gold once these moves start to accelerate  in speed. Now that we have a basis for the broader outlook in precious metals,  it is important for traders to move forward with positioning only after a clear  pivot strategy is developed. When major volatility levels cause breaks in  long-term support and resistance zones, stochastic readings tend to reflect  underlying trend changes that might not be visible using all types of timeframe  analysis.
On the 45-minute charts, we can outline some  specific price levels that can be used to establish new trades into next week.  Precious metals traders likely understand that broader volatility throughout  the market has already reached levels that are above anything else we have seen  in the recorded history of the financial markets. But as long as traders understand  all of these important factors, it is reasonable to start planning a  post-collapse trading strategy that can be used once volatility levels begin to  normalize throughout the market. When the markets finally establish a clear  turnaround, most of the high reward trading opportunities that can still be  found in the market might be centered around assets that are lagging their more  popular counterparts from the same asset class.
This is why I expect market valuations in  silver to have a chance at outperforming the upcoming trend trajectory that is  most likely to be encountered in gold markets. Traders can view the  support/resistance levels that I have outlined above as a way of identifying  how far down bullish traders can reasonably expect price action to be  contained. In my regular market analysis, these specific market price levels  are usually defined using  pivot point trading parameters that determine supply and demand  zones. These price zones must be addressed using stop loss levels and profit  targets that are structured using traditional metrics of risk and reward. Based  on the technical analysis strategies outlined in this commentary, we can see  that there are increasing probabilities which suggest that silver is going to  experience more upside potential when compared to the new trends that are most  likely to emerge in gold.
