White Light lies 75m from the bonanza-grade Starlight discovery recently made at Musgrave’s WA project.
Just four weeks after striking “bonanza” gold at its Starlight discovery, Musgrave Minerals (ASX: MGV) has found another gold lode just 75m away.
Named White Light, it and Starlight are located in Musgrave’s Cue project in the Murchison district of Western Australia.
White Light lies to the south of Starlight and the strike zone runs parallel to the latter. Both lodes remain open to the southeast and down dip.
New reverse circulation (RC) drilling has confirmed the zone as the new intercepts align with a number of historical, isolated gold intersections, Musgrave reported.
The latest assays from White Light include 6m at 54.4 grams per tonne of gold, 6m at 5.4g/t gold, and 9m at 5.1g/t gold.
Musgrave today also reported further assays from Starlight of 6m at 35.8g/t gold and 5m at 7.2g/t gold.
Earlier this month, the company reported what it described as “bonanza” grades from near-surface at Starlight, including 6m at 498.2 g/t gold from a depth of 36m.
The interval was within a broader 42m intercept that graded 77.3g/t gold from 30m. The broader intercept also included 18m at 179.4g/t gold from 30m.
Musgrave managing director Rob Waugh, who previously described the Starlight results as “amazing”, said White Light was another positive result for the company as it built the high-grade resource at Cue.
“Drilling is continuing, and we are confident we can extend the lodes and make new discoveries as our geological knowledge of the system grows,” he said.
Musgrave is expanding its RC drilling program following the White Light discovery as it builds toward a resource update in the September quarter.
The Cue project has an indicated and inferred mineral resource of 6.45 million tonnes at 3g/t gold, for a contained 613,000 ounces.
Musgrave has defined a prospective gold corridor of more than 28km in length that includes the Break of Day-Starlight, Lake Austin North and Mainland-Consols gold discoveries.
The project is south of the small WA town of Cue and the Great Northern Highway passes the area to the east.
Drilling at both lodes is now focused on infilling and extending the high-grade gold mineralisation; it will also continue to test for new lodes within the Break of Day and Lena systems.
The new mineralised intercepts at White Light align with earlier hits reported by Musgrave in 2017, 2019 and this year.
Those previous assays included 11m at 54g/t gold, 3m at 38.8g/t gold, 3m at 13.9g/t gold, and 3m at 7.2g/t gold.
