Nikola and DraftKings Stock Started as ‘SPACs.’ What Investors Need to Know.
The World Health Organization reported its largest single-day surge in coronavirus cases yet, while the Robert Koch Institute said Germany’s reproduction rate surged to 2.03 after a big outbreak at a North Rhine-Westphalia abattoir.
“The market is caught between fears of a second Covid wave and improving data. Financial conditions are easing, and the early June surveys have improved markedly, but with U.S. case counts on the rise, and small clusters register globally, investors remain jittery. And probably will until a vaccine is in hand,” said Stephen Innes, chief global markets strategist at AxiCorp.
The price of gold added 0.8%, to $1,759.30, its highest settle value since 2012, as the U.S. dollar declined. The yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note fell rose than 1 basis point, or hundredth of a percentage point, to 0.704% as the price of the securities slipped.
Oil ticked up thanks to continued expectations for an increase in demand as economies reopen. The price of WTI crude settled up 1.8%, at $40.46 a barrel, while Brent crude rose 2.1% to $43.08. Both are the highest settled values since the first week of March.
Despite reopening efforts, badly-bruised travel stocks were still hurting. American Airlines Group (ticker: AAL) shares fell 6.8% as the airline seeks to raise $3.5 billion in debt and equity to boost its liquidity. Delta Air Lines (DAL) shares closed down 0.7% and United Airlines (UAL) fell 0.8% following a Bloomberg report that said it was looking to raise $5 billion.
Cruise-line stocks were weaker as well. Norwegian Cruise Line (NCLH) shares dropped 6.4% and Carnival (CCL) declined 3.2%.
Tyson Foods (TSN) shares fell 2.8% after China suspended some imports of chicken from the company following an increase in coronavirus cases at its plant in Springdale, Ark.
Stock in the German payments company Wirecard (WDI.XE) plunged 44% after its board said a missing €1.9 billion of cash probably doesn’t exist. Wirecard said it is having “constructive discussions” with its lenders about its credit lines, is considering cost cuts and the disposal of business units and product segments.
Apple (AAPL) stock closed 2.6% higher as investors liked what they heard at the iPhone-maker’s WWDC virtual event. Intel (INTC), which Apple said it will stop relying on for Mac processors, saw its shares rise 0.8%.
