Newmont stock climbed on Tuesday after the company reported adjusted earnings just shy of Wall Street’s expectations. The stock’s run continued as the price of gold rose more than $18 per ounce on Tuesday.
Where we were. Newmont stock (ticker: NEM) has soared 48% in 2020, and 109% in the past 12 months. Shares of the gold miner have soared as investors turned to gold —and the companies that mine it—amid economic uncertainty, even before the coronavirus pandemic slammed global markets.
Newmont hiked its quarterly dividend to 25 cents a share last month, up 79% from a prior 14 cents a share. CEO Tom Palmer recently told Barron’s his company is “incredibly well positioned. He noted last year’s merger with Goldcorp and a joint venture with Barrick Gold (GOLD) in Nevada are already paying off.
What’s new. Newmont reported earnings of $1.02 per share. Adjusted earnings of 40 cents per share were below estimates calling for 42 cents per share.
The company reported an average realized price for gold of $1,591, up $291 per ounce from last year’s first quarter. Attributable gold production rose 20% year-over-year to 1.5 million ounces.
“We are responding to Covid-19 from a position of strength, taking proactive steps to prioritize the well-being of our employees and the communities in which we operate,” Palmer said in the news release.
Looking ahead. Newmont withdrew its 2020 outlook in March. Though Covid-19 disrupted some of its operations, the company noted operations representing 90% of its planned 2020 production were again operating as of May 4.
Palmer noted the company’s adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization were $1.1 billion, while free cash flow clocked in at $611 million.
“Our robust balance sheet provides us with significant financial flexibility to continue allocating capital where it is needed most during this time of uncertainty, while maintaining our industry-leading returns to shareholders,” he added.
Newmont stock rose 3.3% to $64.82 on Tuesday. The price of gold was up 1.3% to $1,710.38 an ounce. Barrick Gold shares jumped 3%.
Newmont Stock Gained After Earnings Lagged Estimates. Rising Gold Prices Helped.
Newmont stock climbed on Tuesday after the company reported adjusted earnings just shy of Wall Street’s expectations.
