The project cost $487 and took eight days to complete.
If your mum never told you to stop drawing on the walls, your house might look something like 25-year-old Daniel Bland's – full of bold colours, textures, intricate lights and overgrown houseplants.
Bland's decor taste proved too "weird" for his first house, a new-build, so he moved to Wesbich, England where he could buy a large Victorian home to use as a canvas.
In eight days, he transformed the unremarkable bathroom into a thing of faux gold and fake marble beauty with just £250 ($487) of materials.
A video of the project posted to Instagram and TikTok has racked up more than six million views and has everyone is asking: "Is he painting the floor?" and "what the hell is that on the walls?"
Daniel Bland's bathroom transformation - cost NZ$487.
Bland covered the tiles on the floor with a layer of epoxy resin, which he marbled with a powder pigment.
"You have to work quite quickly with resin because it starts heating up and setting, which is the stressful part, as you mix the two parts together," he says.
Bland did a one-day training course to learn how to use it safely. He'd done hand-painted marble effects on tables before, but this was the first time he'd tried it with resin, and also his first attempt at a floor.
He put some wood at the door so it would flow out of the room and started pouring, then used a hairdryer to blow the pigment around.
Was he scared he'd mess it up? "Completely. All the time. With everything."
The colour scheme is inspired by luxurious Italian homes.
"I don't know why I went for the whole shower but I wanted to incorporate the colour and was worried about losing paint because it's not as water-resistant as what I use in the gilding," he said.
Gilding is a decorative technique for applying a very thin coating of gold to solid surfaces like metal or stone, which Bland often uses on furniture and artworks.
The shower is coated in imitation gold leaf, oil-based 'gold size' glue and three coats of varnish to seal it. Bland gives it a quick dry down after showers and says it's "still perfect - thank god," but he isn't yet sure how well it will last over time.
"I moved here because the houses were cheap. I fell in love with older houses and wanted a DIY project, not having any background in it at all," he says, "I've just been winging it."
He's been working on the house for three years part-time and manages a pet shop part-time, while he builds a fledgling design business.
"YouTube is a great resource, but most of it is has been trial and error."
There was no intention for Instagram to become a hobby, but through it, he has discovered a community of "interiors nerds".
Bland is already anticipating a second round of redecorations once the last room – a master suite in the loft – is complete.
"I basically can't sit still. DIY is great if you don't mind messing up and learning from it. There's definitely stuff I've messed up and had to do again," he says.
Daniel Bland ran out of canvases, so he painted the walls.
His favourite room is a personal art studio, inspired by A-ha's music video for Take On Me.
Bland painted the room entirely white and then used black paint to create outlines on everything so it looks two-dimensional. Bland also painted the furniture and himself in the same style.
"I'm used to it now. I kind of forget about it until someone else comes in and goes - what is this? Then I'm like oh yeah," he says.
The house isn't to his family's taste.
"I've always been a weird one that they let get on with things, so they're not really surprised."
If and when the time comes to sell the house, Bland says he can always paint things back to normal.
Although he thinks the tide is starting to turn on minimalism and white walls.
"People are starting to buy more special things and be braver, even in rented spaces. People are painting their own furniture, or putting up weird wallpaper," he says.
Bland's canvas art featured in the winning design project in a live Grand Designs trade show competition in Birmingham. He got to meet host Kevin McCloud as well, although he says he'd be too terrified to enter the actual series.
He's got one room left to rip apart and re-plaster, except for the loft. The plan is to make a master suite up there, but he'll first need to put in a staircase and get it insulated.
"There's lots of unfinished stuff that I've abandoned until I come back to it. I've got the space to be able to do that, which is great. I don't set a schedule, it's when I can be bothered. I'm a normal person, I get bored sometimes."
