An 87th-minute field goal to Clint Gutherson has delivered Parramatta a dramatic 25-24 golden-point NRL victory over a plucky Canberra outfit.
Earlier in the evening, Gold Coast handed Brisbane its fifth-straight loss with a 30-12 win, while North Queensland outclassed Newcastle 32-20.
The Eels' win at Western Sydney Stadium might have come at a cost, however, with star half-back Mitchell Moses suffering a suspected calf injury in the first half of Saturday night's contest.
Moses appeared to show signs of discomfort when trying to come off the defensive line before eventually limping off the field.
The Eels looked set to overcome the loss of their chief playmaker when they surged to a 12-point lead with 12 minutes remaining.
But the Raiders stormed back to force extra time through two Charnze Nicoll-Klokstad tries in three minutes.
The Canberra full-back first pounced on a George Williams kick in the 76th minute, before finishing off an Elliott Whitehead line break in the return set.
Jack Wighton, Gutherson and Williams all had looks at a match-winning field goal in the first period of extra time, but all failed to convert.
But Eels captain Gutherson did not waste his second opportunity, stepping up from 30 metres out to seal his side's sixth win from their opening seven matches.
The Eels remain at the top of the ladder, while the Raiders have lost three of their past four matches and might drop as low as seventh.
It was a thrilling finish to a contest which was almost moved after two ACL injuries to Sydney Roosters players on Friday night prompted an emergency inspection.
The surface was cleared early on Saturday morning by the NRL, however both teams were instructed to warm up in the sheds instead of on the ground.
Alarm bells are ringing for Brisbane after being upset 30-12 by battlers Gold Coast at Lang Park, with the Broncos now on the end of five straight losses.
Already under the pump, Broncos coach Anthony Seibold is now facing enormous pressure after his side was ambushed by the Titans who grabbed a shock 22-0 half-time lead.
The 6,262-strong crowd — allowed into the ground for the first time at a Broncos match since the NRL's resumption — booed their team off the field at the break.
Their mood would not have improved as the Titans sealed their biggest win over the Broncos, eclipsing their 34-18 result in 2009.
The Titans never gave the Broncos a break during their 18-point victory.
Nothing went right for the Broncos.
They were reduced to 11 men on the field in the dying moments after enforcer Matt Lodge went off with left knee injury in the 65th minute, then winger Corey Oates was sin binned and they ran out of interchanges.
Adding further insult, Brisbane will drop to the bottom of the ladder if Canterbury defeat Wests Tigers on Sunday.
It marks the first time in eight years Brisbane has dropped five straight and the ninth time in club history.
It was just the Gold Coast's second win in 18 matches.
Remarkably the Titans notched four first-half tries, including a double to winger Anthony Don.
Newcastle has received a reality check following its solid start to the season via a 32-20 defeat to North Queensland in Townsville.
A day after coach Adam O'Brien warned his team were not doing as well as they thought, the Knights looked lethargic and confused against a rampaging Cowboys outfit devoid of some big stars.
With Michael Morgan and Valentine Holmes sidelined, experienced forwards Jason Taumalolo and Josh McGuire were ruthless up front against the favoured Knights pack.
Taumalolo in particular was immense, celebrating his 100th NRL win with 264 run metres from 24 carries, 96 post-contact metres and 27 tackles.
A week earlier, the Cowboys were on the wrong end of a 34-0 first-half thumping by the Wests Tigers but returned the favour for the Knights to take a 26-0 lead into the break.
Hamiso Tabuai-Fidow (centre) was among the try scorers for the Cowboys.
And despite three tries in 16 minutes to begin the second half and a late four-pointer to Gehamat Shibasaki, the Knights could not recover from their horror start.
They mounted somewhat of a comeback in the second half, when, in the final minute, Kalyn Ponga was denied the chance to score by five-eighth Scott Drinkwater, but a penalty try was not awarded.
Drinkwater was sent to the sin-bin for the professional foul, but he went smiling as the Cowboys celebrated their first win in a month.
The Knights' pack were punished through the middle as the Cowboys erupted with energy unmatched by the visitors.
The Cowboys successfully dented Ponga's impact by finishing sets with a kick into touch, limiting space and time for the full-back with ball in hand.
It was a tactic that frustrated the Knights' playmaker, who still managed to set up a try for Hymel Hunt, but finished with just 73 running metres, well below his average of 147 for the season.
