Last Updated at July 2, 2020 14:55 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
From this calendar year’s high of 32,444 touched on January 2, the Nifty Bank Index fell a steep 47.9 per cent to 16,918 on March 23. From that low point, the index has recovered 29.9 per cent. Banking and financial services funds, too, have shown a recovery of 15.8 per cent on an average over the past three months.
They have clocked higher gain (10.4 per cent) than any other category over the past month. Several factors are responsible for this bounce back by the banking and financial sector. One, the massive injection of liquidity by global central banks has sparked a global ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
