Tune in now for Markets news, views & cues
05:55 Min | July 02, 2020, 9:02 AM IST
Tune in! Your daily digest of news, views and cues.
Hi there! Welcome to ETMarkets Morning, the show about money, business and markets. I am Saloni Goel, and here is what we have to start your day.
But first, a quick glance at the state of the markets...
>> Asian stocks saw modest gains on Thursday after positive vaccine developments. Shares edged higher in Hong Kong despite the recent tensions over China’s new national security law. Australia and South Korea also rose. Tokyo gains faded on reduced volumes. Shanghai saw a muted start.
>> The S&P500 closed 0.5% higher overnight, as improving jobs and manufacturing data and positive coronavirus vaccine news boosted investor sentiment. The Nasdaq added 0.95% to close at a record high, but the Dow fell 0.3%.
>> The rupee settled 9 paise lower at 75.60 against the US dollar on Wednesday as concerns over rising Covid-19 cases weighed on investor sentiment even as the domestic equity market was trading in the positive territory.
>> The dollar was on the defensive against more growth-sensitive currencies on Thursday, following upbeat US and European economic data. Sterling traded flat and the euro maintained its gain since the start of week.
>> CRUDE oil prices dipped on Thursday after the US recorded its biggest one-day spike in coronavirus cases. WTI crude futures fell 10 cents, or 0.3%, to $39.72 a barrel while Brent futures eased 6 cents, or 0.1%, to $41.97
All in all, Dalal Street looks headed for a positive start. On Wednesday, Nifty reclaimed the 10,400 mark after four days’ consolidation, formed a bullish candle on the daily chart and made higher highs for lows. Analysts said it has seen a breakout of the consolidation range of last four sessions, but requires follow-up action to start the next leg of rally.
LET ME NOW GIVE YOU A HEADS-UP on some of the top news we are tracking at this hour.
… The Indian economy gathered pace in June with goods movement rebounding close to prelockdown levels and GST collections rising sharply from May. Electricity consumption rose and demand for employment under the MNREGA Scheme fell, suggesting better industrial demand for labour. Bank credit rose Rs 32,022 crore in the fortnight ended June 5. GST collections recovered to Rs 90,917 crore in June from Rs 62,009 crore in May, reflecting a rise in consumption. The manufacturing PMI recovered to 47.2 in June from 30.8 in May.
... Auto and two-wheeler companies clocked sharp month-on-month sales increase in June as pent-up demand and revival in economic activity drove purchases of sedans, SUVs and motorbikes across the country. Hero MotoCorp, M&M and TVS Motor came close to achieving 100% of the pre-Covid-19 sales numbers of February. Maruti Suzuki posted a nearly four-fold month-on-month increase in June numbers with year-on-year sales falling 53%.
... Global index management company MSCI has deferred raising India’s weightage in global indices, theoretically delaying fund inflows from bulge-bracket offshore money managers that typically use the gauges to allocate investment wallets across multiple geographies. By some estimates, about Rs 10,000 crore worth of short-term passive inflows and Rs 40,000 crore in potential active inflows could be affected by the deferral.
… Sebi is probing into the recent jump in the share prices of Ruchi Soya Industries and Alok Industries. The capital market regulator has sought details of unusual trades in the two stocks from stock exchanges, said two people familiar with the matter. BSE and NSE declined to comment while Sebi did not respond to an email query.
… A strong global demand for gold, along with a depreciating rupee, helped the yellow metal to breach the Rs 50,000-per-10gm mark in Mumbai’s retail market on Wednesday. This is the first time the price of the precious metal, with which Indians associate sentimentally, crossed the psychologically important level. At the same time, on leading commodities bourse MCX, the price was hovering just below the Rs 49,000 mark for contracts that will expire in August’s first week.
… India and China have broadly agreed to restart the gradual and verifiable troop disengagement from “friction points” in Galwan Valley and Gogra-Hot Springs areas of eastern Ladakh, which got derailed the last time after Chinese soldiers reneged on the pullback agreement, leading to the bloody clashes on June 15. However, there has been no breakthrough yet on defusing the major troop confrontation at Pangong Tso, where PLA soldiers have built a large number of fortifications and taken the dominating heights.
·  The CBI has filed a case of cheating and forgery against GVK Group, its chairman V K Reddy and Mumbai International Airport MD Sanjay Reddy, among others, for wrongful gain of Rs 705 crore and a loss to the exchequer between 2012 and 2018.
· Carlyle will buy a 25% stake in Bharti Airtel’s data centre arm for $235 million. The acquisition, by an affiliate of Carlyle, will give Airtel’s Nxtra Data an enterprise valuation of about $1.2 billion
· Haldia Petrochemicals along with an international partner Rhone Capital has acquired US-based Lummus Technology at an enterprise value of $2.7 billion (about Rs 20,590 crore) from McDermott International.
· American private equity investor TA Associates has picked up slightly more than 2% stake in National Stock Exchange from existing investors for $150 million, or about Rs 1,134 crore.
That’s it for now. For all the market news through the day, do track ETMarkets.com. Have a great day ahead! Bye-bye.
