Should you trim your equity exposure and move to gold? Hemang Jani explains
Escorts definitely is looking good but the stock has run up quite a lot.
Govt needs to understand the difference between self-sufficiency and self-reliance: Swaminathan Aiyar
I do not think there is a case for a significant correction at this point of time, says Head Equity Strategist, Broking & Distribution, MOFSL .
Are we likely to settle into a range? Do you think they should not expect too much of a downside because there is so much liquidity? What is your take?
We have to keep in mind that the volatility has actually settled down to around 30 odd levels from the very high levels that we had seen earlier. We are seeing a fair bit of stability in the global markets. Of course because of the resurfacing of some of the cases, you may see a little bit of volatility across the global markets including India but I think there is a bit of a stability in terms of the index levels.
Of course the participation is limited to a few sectors where there is a strong growth visibility and interesting themes and we are seeing a much larger activity in terms of cash market volumes. So I think barring a little bit of correction and consolidation in the market, I do not think there is a case for a significant correction at this point of time as we see more incremental positive data points over the next few weeks.
What do you make of the JSPL deal ? On one side, the debt in the listed entity goes lower but debt in the promoter entity goes higher. How do you think markets are likely to view this transaction?
The structure of the deal is not looking that transparent though definitely there was a bit of pressure on them to really reduce the debt in the company’s balance sheet. They could have looked at various other options to do this particular exercise. So the deal per se in terms of the deleverage part is looking good but the manner in which it has been done is not very comforting. But nevertheless, overall things are falling in place for the company in terms of the business operations and if there is further deleveraging, the market would definitely take it positively.
How will the markets react to these numbers?
Clearly, the sentiment towards the oil PSUs is not good, particularly for companies like ONGC. This kind of impairment loss would also raise a bit of alarm bells as to what is really going on in terms of the price realisations. Because of the environment around us, there is not a case for a significant improvement in terms of growth. I think these are the companies where they will continue to look good on valuation parameters and may be on dividend yield parameters but these are not high quality growth-oriented companies. So we do have a buy on the stock but this will not give you a very high visibility in terms of growth. So somebody who is looking for a low beta play, this can be a good stock to have in the portfolio.
How does one justify gold versus equity? In the last 10 years, gold and Nifty have given the same returns. If you bought gold, all you had to do is keep it in your bank or keep it in your demat account. There was no emotional drain on you because of what is happening in the world. Gold irrespective of how good the outlook for equities has been has given steady returns.
What you are saying is right. When you look at the performance, gold over the last couple of years has been a standout performer but from an investment point of view, we may all have our views and preferences in terms of certain asset classes. From an investor point of view, what matters is what kind of allocation one has done towards different asset classes to have stability. So given the way the money is being printed by the US and the kind of stimulus that we have seen, definitely the sense one is getting is it makes more sense to allocate slightly more towards something like gold where things are going to be far more stable.
But typically one also has to remember that after such a strong outperformance at this point of time, if you take a very aggressive allocation call, it may not play out that well because equities in the last two years have undergone correction and that is a time when you really look at adding some more to the equity exposure because maybe in the next two or three years, it could give you a much better upside. So rather than taking such allocation calls when things have already played out, it makes more sense to have a strategic call and then look for some kind of a stable growth.
Why are PSU stocks suddenly back? Not in terms of price action but the volume action in BHEL. Yesterday, 8.1 crore shares on the National Stock Exchange, 62 million shares in BEL were traded. Why are some of the PSU stocks back and commanding huge volumes?
Yes, absolutely. So a couple of things. One is if you look at the performances of some of these companies, particularly BEL, the operating performance has been much better. The working capital cycle has improved and that can be the case with some of the oil marketing companies as well because they have taken a phenomenal price increase in the last three to four weeks. I think people may really want to look at some of these companies from a growth point of view and after going through a massive correction over the last two years, there might be some interest at some value point for some of the companies like BHEL where the floating stock anyway is less.
I think company by company, we have to really look at how things are moving in terms of their business performances and valuations and one can look at BEL. We continue to definitely like it. Oil marketing companies definitely have a preference for IOC and BPCL. So I think we should look at some of these companies because over the next 6 to 12 months, you can get a much better risk reward ratio at this point of time.
The silver lining definitely could be the tractor data. Would you then turn bullish on M&M as well as Escorts?
Yes, absolutely. There is a good amount of traction building in for some of the rural side agri-based plays. So we expect good strong numbers for tractors from Mahindra & Mahindra. More importantly, the overall contribution to EBIT will go up from 32% to 38%. The new management has come in and the capital allocation policy will undergo a change; so we think Mahindra & Mahindra definitely looks quite promising.
Escorts definitely is looking good but the stock has run up quite a lot. So it may not be a great entry point at this point of time but rural as a theme, including for some of the two-wheeler companies where the numbers are going to be out, like Hero Motors one should really look for as there might be some positive surprise over there.
