‘Pretty soon that pen will start moving’ … David Lynch teaches scriptwriting. Photograph: MasterClass
During a section entitled Say Yes to Weird Experiences, humourist David Sedaris encourages various surreal pursuits that suggest only that he has quite a lot of time and money on his hands. “I like to go to another country to get my hair cut,” says Sedaris, as though hopping on a plane to chat with a barber in Japan for inspiration is a realistic option for impecunious writers. Gordon Ramsay’s scrambled eggs, which require white truffle and sea urchin, also seem more eccentric than educational.
I follow Lynch's writing tips and sit on a lawn chair facing east with wine, cigarettes, a writing pad and a pen
With schoolchildren being forced to embrace video-conferencing, is education facing a future along MasterClass lines? “Education is changing,” says Rogier. “The old ways are breaking down. We don’t measure success on grades or certificates, but on actual impact. We ask our members if they learned something that changed their life. But education and learning aren’t the same thing. This isn’t online education – it’s a place to learn and grow.”
Have I learned and grown? Not in a life-changing way but enough to help lift the fog and reignite a spark. Herzog’s class was, in all honesty, outstanding. His methods, however, might not be for everyone: it’s possible that reading eighth-century Chinese poetry to “get into the fury of language” when writing a script won’t appeal to those looking to nail a tricky piece of contemporary character dialogue.
Still, there’s no shortage of oddball advice. To advance my script, I ditch the esoteric poetry in favour of Lynch’s writing tips. I sit outside at night, on a lawn chair facing east, with a bottle of red wine – a Bordeaux, he insists – and a packet of cigarettes (even though I quit years ago). On my lap is a yellow writing pad, in my hand a black ballpoint pen, ready. “Pretty soon,” says the legendary film-maker, “that pen will start moving and words will come out.” It does and they do. “Ninety per cent of it will be worthless, horrible stuff,” he adds. “But soon you’ll hit a vein of gold – and it’ll come pouring out.”
• Learn more on the MasterClass website.
This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that third-party cookies will be set. More information .
