Agarwal has over 22 years of experience in the capital markets, and brings in immense and expertise across domestic and international broking houses. In his previous assignments, he has held senior positions as Head of Equity in Bharti AXA Investment Managers, Head of Equity ABN AMRO AMC and as VP & Head (Strategy and Research) at SBI Capital, where he was the youngest team leader heading a full-fledged research team.
Stocks are not rising for nothing! You can indeed invest for the long term
India has consistently run current account deficits over the past several years.
Stock prices are present value of future cash flows that a business is expected to deliver.
2/3rd of top stocks destroyed investor wealth in H1; IndusInd Bank worst hit
The domestic stock market does offer upside to long term investor going forward. While the present times look very uncertain and predicting the near term is tough, let’s ask ourselves the following questions:
· When the market made a new all-time high last, what were the expectations in terms of earnings growth ?
Nifty traded above 12,200 level in the December 2019 and January 2020. At that juncture, there was still positivity about growth. Covid-19 was seemingly not impacting India. Q4 FY20 was expected to be strong on account of an uptick that the economy was witnessing. FY21 was expected to be a strong growth year over FY20.
The outlook changed suddenly and sharply. In March, the mood changed, and people turned cautious. We underwent a very stringent lockdown from the last week of March which continued in April and was gradually relaxed only in June.
A 10-to-15-day loss of business (maps to around 10-18 per cent loss in topline given that a quarter is close to 90 days) in Q4, resulted in a sharp drop of 22 per cent in Nifty earnings. This caused Nifty EPS to drop in FY20 over FY19. In FY21, we should expect to see a further drop in earnings given the lower economic activity in the first quarter and only a gradual opening up.
· When do we expect India Inc to deliver FY19/ FY20 earnings?
If we look at the earnings expectations today, while FY21 earnings are expected to be lower vs that in FY20, the economy is expected to make a sharp recovery in FY22 as Covid-19 issues subside. There is a good possibility of a sharp improvement in the Covid-19 situation if we go by the experience of Europe, where after an initial surge, the improvement in the situation was rapid.
From a low base of FY21, the economic growth in FY22 would seem to be sharp. There is a chance that India’s GDP may attain its earlier high in FY22 or latest by the first half of FY23. The equity index comprises the largest part of India Inc and is expected to attain an earnings high in FY22 itself.
· Which sectors may do relatively better?
There are a few spaces that may perform relatively better. In pharmaceuticals, API manufacturers may have more market access given the support from the government to substitute imports and as foreign buyers diversify their sourcing base away from China. The same may happen in specialty chemicals.
In pharmaceuticals, while acute therapies may see a degrowth because the population is better aware of hygiene, chronic therapies should continue to do well.
The government has managed to shield the agricultural economy much better compared with other sectors. This space has benefitted from last year’s good monsoon and an encore is expected this year. Businesses focused on the agriculture sector should hence do well in FY21 and FY22. These include seeds, herbicides and pesticide manufacturers, agri-inputs (fertiliser and farm nutrients), tractors and farm implements.
Consumption in rural India and tier-II towns should remain strong. We do expect categories like cheaper two-wheelers to do relatively well. Financiers that cater to rural India (microfinance and gold loan companies) should do well.
Another space that may do well is related to people wanting to make their homes more comfortable as they spend more time there and categories like TVs, ACs/coolers, microwaves, washing machines may do well. Financiers of the same should also see demand. Other discretionary spends may suffer sharper degrowth.
We expect lower commodity prices to sustain, given the weak demand and GDP outlook and this gives a gross margin advantage to the branded businesses, particularly FMCG (staples) firms. In uncertain times, cash surplus balance sheets would help.
· Would a slowdown increase the stress on our current account?
India has consistently run current account deficits over the past several years. It was in the early 2000s that the country saw a period of current account surplus. In this period, we had a great chance of becoming a current account-surplus country. In Q4 of FY20, we are already current account surplus, helped by lower prices of crude, gold and electronics imports. While crude prices have moved up, they are still substantially lower than levels seen last year and would continue to help savings.
Electronics imports should again be lower, as people postpone replacement of existing mobile handsets. Capital goods imports would continue to be lower because of low capacity utilisation. Moreover, we are looking at the western world normalising ahead of us. This provides some tailwinds to our exports, while our imports would continue to be sluggish for some more time.
Hence, there is a great chance that our current account situation would remain under control and we do not see stress on the external front as a country.
· When would the market re-attain their previous highs?
If GDP attains its earlier highs in FY22/FY23 and index EPS attains its earlier high in the same period (if not slightly earlier), we should expect the market to regain its high a year in advance as it digests future expectations.
Stock prices are present value of future cash flows that a business is expected to deliver. With lower interest rates and, hence, lower discount rates applied to future earnings, the present value of the same earnings stream would be higher. Today the risk premium applied may be high given the uncertainty, but we do expect it to normalise as the times become more normal. We do expect lower interest rates to sustain and this should provide a tailwind to the markets over time.
Liquidity and interest rates, which have enabled valuations to remain elevated in the past, remain benign and are expected to remain so over time. Valuations on P/book value and market cap-to-GDP basis do point to substantially lower prices, which could correct as earnings bounce back.
In summation, though the present times are uncertain, the market does present an upside for long-term investors who can use the current uncertain period to gradually build a portfolio.
(Disclaimer: The opinions expressed in this column are that of the writer. The facts and opinions expressed here do not reflect the views of www.economictimes.com .)
