We hit another milestone in June.
Today, the count of COVID-19 cases here in the U.S. has officially risen above 2.5 million.
Things can always get worse, right? Keep whispering that mantra under your breath, it’ll help.
If you’re like me and trying to find any silver linings during this crisis, all you need to do is know where to look.
Fortunately for me, the answer was sitting right behind me.
A few weeks ago, I mentioned that my coworker, Christian DeHaemer , has a knack for breaking Wall Street's secrets.
“That’s the trick, it’s not a secret,” he told me after a little prodding this morning, “just take a look at this.”
All he sent me was one simple chart:
That’s the cracked a coy smile he perfected in the U.S. Navy, “You also won’t need a mask to share in those profits.”
Yesterday, every gold bug on the planet felt a smidgen of smug satisfaction as an ounce of gold topped $1,804 on the Comex.
For Chris and his readers, who have been banking on gold stocks for more than five years.
Just recently, we learned about another huge crisis in Wuhan, China. It turns out that the gold some companies were used as loan collateral was nothing more than copper wrapped in gold.
The sheer size of the scandal is staggering — 83 tons of counterfeit gold!
When I brought this up with Chris, he immediately started to chuckle.
“Let ‘em burn,” he cackled, “besides, the real money in gold is staring right back at us. And there’s a perfect storm that’s been brewing ever since the first cast of COVID surfaced.”
According to him, three critical catalysts were triggered that is going to send gold even higher. These events have molded together over the last few years. The dam finally broke when the pandemic blindsided everyone.
Yet, there’s one rub in all of this.
Not all gold investments are created equal.
And no, I’m not talking about owning physical gold.
Now, it’s no secret that Chris has been bullish on gold miners ; he told you that much himself yesterday.
The problem, however, is that sorting the wheat from the chaff among gold miners is no easy feat.
Our analysts have traveled the world over, dedicated to finding the best and most profitable investments in the global energy markets. All you have to do to join our Energy and Capital investment community is sign up for the daily newsletter below.
You'll also get our free report, 3 Gold ETFs to Buy and Hold Forever
More importantly, both of us know how difficult it is to build the perfect portfolio in today's chaotic market. And make no mistake, the toll that COVID-19 is taking on the world is utterly devastating.
In May, one report suggested that COVID-19 will end up costing the global economy as much as $82 trillion between now and 2025.
Here in the United States, the economic toll could top $20 trillion.
Yet, investors like Chris still have a knack for pocketing cold, hard cash for his readers. You can bet that they’re making money hand over fist as the gold bull rages on, too.
On more than a few occasions, I’ve personally witnessed his readers double their money by targeting the right gold stocks.
As I said, he has a nose for profiting from precious metals.
Back in 2016, two back-to-back trades in Avino Silver and First Majestic Silver netted our investment community 157% and 201%, respectively.
They took those golden profits in short order, too.
Don’t take my word for it. As a premium member of Energy and Capital, you have full access to three of Chris’s three must-own gold stock s –– at zero cost to you –– right here.
