ASA Gold and Precious Metals is registered in Bermuda with “shareholder services” in Portland, Maine and investment manager Merk Investments in San Francisco.
This miner dipped in mid-March to below the 2018 low of about 8. ASA has recovered from the massive 1st quarter sell-off and now is priced at above 17.
is headquartered in South Africa with operations in Africa, the Americas and Australia.
AngloGold Ashanti weekly price chart, 7 1 20.
This one shows a steadier uptrend than the others with each low slightly higher than the previous one. AngloGold could be picked up for about 8 in mid-2018 and then at about 13 in March of this year. This week the price is above 29.
B2 Gold is based in Vancouver, British Columbia with mining operations around the world.
Take a look at the extraordinary volatility of B2Gold so far this year. From 4.8 in early February all the way down to 2.2 by mid-March and then all the way back up to 5.63.
Gold Fields is a South African-based mining company with operations in that nation as well as in Peru, Australia and West Africa.
Gold Fields weekly price chart, 7 1 20.
Goldfields is another gold stock chart with a somewhat steadier upward bent than the others. Below 2.5 at the 2018 low and then a rally up to above 7.5 this February. A dip back down to below 4 and it’s now above 9.
Seabridge Gold is a Canadian miner based in Toronto, Ontario and in Smithers, British Columbia.
Seabridge Gold weekly price chart, 7 1 20.
You can see how different this chart is than the other gold stock price charts. This year’s February/March dip took out the previous lows of the past 3 years. Now, Seabridge has rallied to a new high of 17.5.
Sandstorm Gold hit just below 3.50 during the mid-March mad selling and is now priced at 9.57.
Sandstorm Gold weekly price chart, 7 1 20.
No recommendation to buy is made.
It’s just that you may have been so focused lately on hot big-name tech stocks that you failed to observe the price action of these in the precious metals sector. It’s not been kept secret but, on the other hand, they don’t seem to get mentioned anywhere near as much despite the positive movement.
All are traded on the New York Stock Exchange so plenty of analyst-style information should be available to investors with interest.
Whether the bullish trend in gold stocks stems from classic “fear of inflation” or just fear in general, it’s impossible to say for sure. That they’ve been headed upward steadily for weeks is clear.
I do not hold positions in these investments. No recommendations are made one way or the other.  If you're an investor, you'd want to look much deeper into each of these situations. You can lose money trading or investing in stocks and other instruments. Always do your own independent research, due diligence and seek professional advice from a licensed investment advisor.
