Eager visitors have battled a cold morning to be one of the first to visit Gold Coast theme parks, reopening for the first time in three months.
Village Roadshow's theme parks Sea World and Paradise Country, along with Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary, welcomed their first guests since the coronavirus shutdown.
The Kay family from Brisbane arrived at Sea World before the gates officially opened at 9.30am.
Oliver Kay said they did it to beat the crowds.
"We hope to be one of the first ones in," he said.
Helen Kay said they wanted to support the local Gold Coast tourism industry, with the borders still closed to interstate travellers.
"We immediately booked our favourite hotel and they upgraded us to a bigger room," she said.
Mr Kay said protective measures taken by the State Government helped his family feel safer.
"I personally want them to keep [the borders] closed a little longer so we can see those numbers come down again," Mr Kay said.
Crowds line up to enter Sea World this morning.
Kayne Evans from Beaudesert said his children had been looking forward to this day.
"We haven't been here in a while and the kids have been pestering for it," he said.
Ashton, 11, and Emma, 8, were excited for their first visit to Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary.
"Mum just asked Emma if she wanted to go to it because it's her birthday," Ashton said.
"I've never have seen a red panda before and I really want to see it," Emma said.
Queensland Tourism Minister Kate Jones welcomed guests back to Sea World in limited numbers, under government-approved COVID-19 plans.
"To be able to reopen Sea World today means thousands of their team members will be back at work, doing what they love best which is welcoming tourists to the beautiful Gold Coast," Ms Jones said.
"Come out and support the thousands of jobs that rely on us visiting them during tourism hot season," Ms Jones said.
Village Roadshow will cap ticketing at 50 per cent of capacity and has introduced an app for guests to pre-book rides. Tickets for Currumbin must be booked online.
Village Roadshow CEO Clark Kirby said they were looking forward to guests returning today, but as it was a school day, neither company was expecting to be full.
Kate Jones addresses the media, with Village Roadshow's Clark Kirby and Bikash Randhawa, at the reopening of Sea World on the Gold Coast.
"After what seemed three very long months, the day has finally arrived," he said.
Rival theme park operator Ardent Leisure has announced a staged reopening of Dreamworld and WhiteWater World in time for the September holiday period, with reopening dates to be confirmed in the coming weeks.
Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary general manager Michael Kelly said he and his team were very excited to welcome back guests to their park.
"Everyone is jumping for joy to welcome guests back," Mr Kelly said.
The park has received $1 million from a $50 million recovery package announced by the Queensland government.
"You will have to pre-register to come in to the sanctuary," Mr Kelly said.
A small number of attractions, including the Sanctuary's heritage miniature train, would also be closed to meet social distancing guidelines.
"That'll be things like our enclosed spaces, nocturnal corridors and alike," he said.
Like the other theme parks in the city, Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary lost millions of dollars in revenue during the shutdown.
Will the hotel bookings come?
Two of the Gold Coast's five-star hotels, The Star and Sofitel, also reopened this week.
Sofitel Broadbeach general manager Rens Breur said he was relieved to have people bringing a vibe and atmosphere back to the building.
"An empty hotel is exactly what it sounds like," he said.
Rens Breur is happy to be open for business.
Accor operates 26 hotels on the Gold Coast and spokesperson Claire Haigh said online interest was strong for when restrictions were relaxed but that it was difficult to know if the bookings would come.
"Who's gone through a pandemic like this before, on this scale?" she said.
"We have no idea what consumer buying behaviour is going to be like.
