This Insider Has Just Sold Shares In Gran Colombia Gold Corp. (TSE:GCM)
Simply Wall St July 2, 2020
Some Gran Colombia Gold Corp. ( TSE:GCM ) shareholders may be a little concerned to see that insider Eric Sprott recently sold a substantial CA$1.3m worth of stock at a price of CA$6.74 per share. However, it’s crucial to note that they remain very much invested in the stock and that sale only reduced their holding by 3.2%.
Notably, that recent sale by insider Eric Sprott was not the only time they traded Gran Colombia Gold shares this year. They previously purchased CA$20m worth of shares at a price of CA$5.60 per share. That means that an insider was happy to buy shares at around the current price of CA$6.88. While their view may have changed since the purchase was made, this does at least suggest they have had confidence in the company’s future. We do always like to see insider buying, but it is worth noting if those purchases were made at well below today’s share price, as the discount to value may have narrowed with the rising price. In this case we’re pleased to report that the insider bought shares at close to current prices. Eric Sprott was the only individual insider to buy shares in the last twelve months. Notably Eric Sprott was also the biggest seller.
Eric Sprott bought 6.83m shares over the last 12 months at an average price of CA$5.12. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
There are always plenty of stocks that insiders are buying. So if that suits your style you could check each stock one by one or you could take a look at this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
I like to look at how many shares insiders own in a company, to help inform my view of how aligned they are with insiders. Usually, the higher the insider ownership, the more likely it is that insiders will be incentivised to build the company for the long term. Gran Colombia Gold insiders own about CA$62m worth of shares. That equates to 13% of the company. While this is a strong but not outstanding level of insider ownership, it’s enough to indicate some alignment between management and smaller shareholders.
What Might The Insider Transactions At Gran Colombia Gold Tell Us?
Insiders sold stock recently, but they haven’t been buying. In contrast, they appear keener if you look at the last twelve months. We like that insiders own a fair amount of the company. So the recent selling doesn’t worry us too much. While we like knowing what’s going on with the insider’s ownership and transactions, we make sure to also consider what risks are facing a stock before making any investment decision. In terms of investment risks, we’ve identified 3 warning signs with Gran Colombia Gold and understanding these should be part of your investment process.
But note: Gran Colombia Gold may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you decide to trade Gran Colombia Gold, use the lowest-cost* platform that is rated #1 Overall by Barron’s, Interactive Brokers . Trade stocks, options, futures, forex, bonds and funds on 135 markets, all from a single integrated account.
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned.
Have feedback on this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
