Simply Wall St March 11, 2020
As an investor, mistakes are inevitable. But really bad investments should be rare. So consider, for a moment, the misfortune of NorthIsle Copper and Gold Inc. ( CVE:NCX ) investors who have held the stock for three years as it declined a whopping 76%. That’d be enough to cause even the strongest minds some disquiet. And over the last year the share price fell 43%, so we doubt many shareholders are delighted. Unfortunately the share price momentum is still quite negative, with prices down 38% in thirty days. But this could be related to poor market conditions — stocks are down 18% in the same time.
With just CA$99,659 worth of revenue in twelve months, we don’t think the market considers NorthIsle Copper and Gold to have proven its business plan. This state of affairs suggests that venture capitalists won’t provide funds on attractive terms. As a result, we think it’s unlikely shareholders are paying much attention to current revenue, but rather speculating on growth in the years to come. It seems likely some shareholders believe that NorthIsle Copper and Gold will find or develop a valuable new mine before too long.
We think companies that have neither significant revenues nor profits are pretty high risk. There is almost always a chance they will need to raise more capital, and their progress – and share price – will dictate how dilutive that is to current holders. While some such companies do very well over the long term, others become hyped up by promoters before eventually falling back down to earth, and going bankrupt (or being recapitalized). Some NorthIsle Copper and Gold investors have already had a taste of the bitterness stocks like this can leave in the mouth.
NorthIsle Copper and Gold had liabilities exceeding cash by CA$60k when it last reported in September 2019, according to our data. That puts it in the highest risk category, according to our analysis. But since the share price has dived -38% per year, over 3 years , it looks like some investors think it’s time to abandon ship, so to speak. The image below shows how NorthIsle Copper and Gold’s balance sheet has changed over time; if you want to see the precise values, simply click on the image. You can click on the image below to see (in greater detail) how NorthIsle Copper and Gold’s cash levels have changed over time.
In reality it’s hard to have much certainty when valuing a business that has neither revenue or profit. Would it bother you if insiders were selling the stock? I’d like that just about as much as I like to drink milk and fruit juice mixed together. You can click here to see if there are insiders selling.
We regret to report that NorthIsle Copper and Gold shareholders are down 43% for the year. Unfortunately, that’s worse than the broader market decline of 12%. However, it could simply be that the share price has been impacted by broader market jitters. It might be worth keeping an eye on the fundamentals, in case there’s a good opportunity. Longer term investors wouldn’t be so upset, since they would have made 9.9%, each year, over five years. If the fundamental data continues to indicate long term sustainable growth, the current sell-off could be an opportunity worth considering. I find it very interesting to look at share price over the long term as a proxy for business performance. But to truly gain insight, we need to consider other information, too. Like risks, for instance. Every company has them, and we’ve spotted 4 warning signs for NorthIsle Copper and Gold (of which 3 are a bit concerning!) you should know about.
But note: NorthIsle Copper and Gold may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with past earnings growth (and further growth forecast).
Please note, the market returns quoted in this article reflect the market weighted average returns of stocks that currently trade on CA exchanges.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
