Tietto Minerals’ resource at its 2 million ounce-plus African gold project looks set for a boost following more high-grade drill hits below the existing resource. Credit: File
Perth-based gold play, Tietto Minerals’ resource inventory numbers at its 2 million ounce-plus West African gold project look set for a boost following more high-grade drill hits below the existing resource. The ASX-listed explorer has seen some serious success with the drill bit this year at its Abujar-Gludehi or “AG” gold deposit, part of its 2.2Moz Abujar gold project in Côte d’Ivoire.
Its ongoing fully-funded 50,000m diamond drilling campaign has now encountered further high-grade gold mineralisation at AG. Best recent intersections are 7m grading 8.16 grams per tonne gold from 440m depth including 3m at 17.16g/t.
Other notable results include 2m at 15.91g/t gold from 233m, 9m at 2.41g/t gold including a metre at 18.44g/t gold, and 18m at 1.22g/t gold from 178m which includes a 6m intersection going 2.19g/t gold.
According to the company, the gold system remains open along strike and down dip and it plans to do more step-back drilling to test the depth limits of the mineralisation and drill more holes along strike. It also hopes to identify new prospects within the Abujar project’s 70km-long corridor, 90% of which it says remains untested.
Most of the company’s attention to-date has been focussed on the AG high-grade core of 19.3 million tonnes grading 2.2 grams per tonne for a contained 1.38Moz and the promising shallow, AG South deposit about 1.5km south of AG.
The high‐grade core at AG continues to grow as our step‐out drilling program delivers further high‐grade gold intercepts. These latest assays have confirmed high‐grade gold mineralisation extends at least 150m below the November 2019 resource model.
Given the consistent high grades and widths intercepted at depth in our drilling, we are planning to drill a number of 650m diamond holes to test this large high‐grade system down to 550m below surface to assess the potential for an underground operation below a future open pit operation.
The latest high-grade drill results combined with several solid intersections from outside the existing mineral resource in the past few months have put Tietto on track for an updated resource estimation in September 2020.
With a fleet of five company-owned diamond drill rigs throwing up a steady flow of encouraging assays and an uninterrupted exploration schedule on site given there have been no Coronavirus cases at Abujar, Tietto looks well placed to realise its ambition of making that most difficult of leaps from explorer to producer.
Is your ASX listed company doing something interesting? Contact: matt.birney@wanews.com.au
