This is a time when liquidity is key, as market experts, economists, and a dose of reality suggest. If you're flush, having money to put into good opportunities is wise. If you're not, cash for emergencies is a must.
But how do you safely keep that liquidity when the most secure bonds lose value and riskier investments are more likely to see untimely dips. Cash in the bank? Lending Tree
's site Magnify Money analyzed thousands of savings and CD accounts only to find "very few … beating the rates of inflation at the time." As with Treasurys, inflation saps away value.
Suggesting precious metals runs the risk of sounding like one of those hard-driving direct marketing organizations that want you to buy gold—from them. One firm I heard from offered the "likely" amount investors would want to put into gold as 35% of their portfolios. That's more than aggressive.
Best to step back a bit first. There's nothing wrong with gold and it can offer strength to a portfolio.
"Gold deserves to be treated like other asset classes in a portfolio: investors should question its sizing more often than its inclusion," said Allen Sukholitsky, founder and chief macro strategist at Xallarap Advisory, who currently is "neutral on the shiny metal."
You might understand why. Gold has taken a big jump over the last couple of years. Pricing on the COMEX commodities market is up about 12.6% since the beginning of the year alone, hovering around $1,715 a troy ounce (slightly heavier than a regular ounce) after a March plummet to $1,478, according to data from S&P Capital IQ. The futures market is pricing in a potential upside of 3.7%.
Here's a look at the last ten years on the London afternoon market:
"You could say that when gold bottomed between 2016 and 2018, it was an asset class that was severely undervalued," said Leigh Goehring, co-managing director of Goehring and Rozencwajg Associates. "It becomes unpopular because it has a lot of competition from other asset classes."
At the point when gold is undervalued, investors start to pay attention. As money is put into the commodity, values pop until it becomes overvalued and then languishes.
Helping set off the most recent resurgence has been the instability of equities. People got spooked and, as the Fed pumped liquidity into the bonds market and drove up prices, trying to find a good hedge against potential further drops in the stock market became harder.
"Gold was actually going down with the market as investors favored cash, namely [the U.S. dollar]," said Adam Vettese, marketing analyst for eToro.com, a trading platform. "Once the dollar was weakened by Fed action, gold became the preferred option once again."
The advantages of gold are that it is universally recognized as a store of value, can act as a liquidity hedge, and can also accrue value in the right market conditions.
In terms of gains, thought, there's a lot of disagreement about where the price might be going.
"Gold needs to take a breather and pull back a little breather first, before we can talk about any continuous rising from this point," said James Richman, CEO & chief investment officer at JJ Richman. "Currently, what's behind a lot of gold's rise is actually the collected enthusiasm and optimism around it, not necessarily its usual intrinsic fundamental drivers."
Goehring thinks that a gold bull market has started. Given actions of the Fed and other central banks continuing to pump money into markets, expecting currency to rise in value with a reduction of supply seems premature.
If gold strikes you as a sound investment, the next step is to determine how much to put in. "Gold is such a polarizing investment that investors often fall into one of two camps: those that believe it should be their only investment and those that believe it's not an investment," Sukholitsky said. "In presentations, I like to say, 'Gold should be a part of your portfolio, but it should not be your portfolio.'"
In terms of portion of portfolios that someone might consider for a gold position, the numbers analysts suggested largely ran from 5% to 10%, although Goehring and his partner Adam Rozencwajg suggested as high as 15% to 20%—depending, of course, on your existing portfolio, resources, personal financial needs, and risk appetite. This isn't a decision to take lightly, without analysis and maybe help, and certainly not at the behest of someone who is trying to get you to sign a sales contract.
When it comes to gold, there are also several ways to proceed. Vettese says that restrictions on the movement of physical gold and the need for security in storage drive up costs.
You could take out futures contracts on gold. "However, the price movement on the spot products or contracts can be quite volatile and some investors don't have that appetite for volatility," Vettese said. Enough of a shift in prices and you could find yourself having to put out significant cash to cover a position.
EFTs provide yet another option. Some cover the physical commodity through contracts and derivatives while others hold equities in gold mining companies to focus on the industry.
Lots of choice and lots of decisions. Remember, if you have the urge, you needn't jump in all at once. Explore your options with your financial advisor.
I'm a freelance journalist and writer with credits in Fortune, the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times Magazine, Newsweek, NBC News, CBS Moneywatch, Technology
I'm a freelance journalist and writer with credits in Fortune, the Wall Street Journal, the New York Times Magazine, Newsweek, NBC News, CBS Moneywatch, Technology Review, The Fiscal Times, Inc, and Vice. I also do ghost and corporate writing. You can see my portfolio at www.linkedin.com/in/eriksherman and find me on Twitter at @eriksherman.
