News updates from the world of economy, markets, and finance
Volatility is back in markets this morning as Asian stocks fell in line with the sharp fall in US stocks late Friday.
The decision by the Centre to extend the nation-wide lockdown by two weeks has not gone well with investors.
Join us as we track the top business news through the day.
Nations around the world are selling record amounts of debt as they try to support their weakened economies. China, for example, is posed to issue a record monthly tally of local government debt in May: @TheTerminal pic.twitter.com/SYfVgcrqAO
— Lisa Abramowicz (@lisaabramowicz1) May 4, 2020
The benchmark stock indices that opened deep in the red in the morning only managed to suffer further losses, closing the day down almost 6%
Reuters reports: "Indian stocks fell sharply on Monday after the government extended a nationwide coronavirus lockdown by two weeks and as tensions between the United States and China dashed hopes of a pick up in global economic activity.
India on Friday extended its nationwide coronavirus lockdown for another two weeks after May 4 while easing restrictions in lower-risk zones, but travel, hotels, restaurants, shopping malls and cinema halls remain shut.
The NSE Nifty 50 index ended 5.74% lower at 9,293.50, clocking its worst day since March 23 and the benchmark S&P BSE Sensex fell 5.94% to 31,715.35.
The NSE gained 14% in April, its best month in 11 years. Still, Both the NSE and BSE are down roughly 23% this year as the coronavirus pandemic clobbers markets worldwide.
Shares in Indian lenders HDFC Bank Ltd, Housing Development Finance Corp and ICICI Bank were the top three drags on the Nifty on Monday.
The broad-based selloff also included sharp losses in automotive stocks after reports of near-zero sales by carmakers in April and metals and mining stocks, which have been particularly sensitive to news of any escalations in U.S.-China trade tensions."
With volatility back in stocks, gold is benefiting as investors seek safe abode in the precious metal.
PTI reports: "Gold prices on Monday rose Rs 213 to Rs 45,740 per 10 gram in futures trade as speculators indulged in creating fresh positions on firm spot demand.
On the Multi Commodity Exchange, gold contracts for June traded higher by Rs 213, or 0.47 per cent, to Rs 45,740 per 10 gram in a business turnover of 13,764 lots.
The yellow metal for August delivery edged up by Rs 328, or 0.72 per cent, to Rs 46,024 per 10 gram in a business turnover of 6,221 lots.
Fresh positions built up by participants on spot demand mainly led to rise in gold prices, analysts said.
U.S. oil prices trade more than 7% lower as traders say China-U.S. relations a source of tension for crude https://t.co/rL699RBPct
The rupee didn't make much recovery during the day after the steep fall in value in the morning session.
PTI reports: "The Indian rupee depreciated by 64 paise to settle at 75.73 (provisional) against the US dollar on Monday tracking heavy selloff in domestic equities and a strengthening greenback overseas.
Traders said the weakness in the local unit was largely due to heavy correction in domestic equities and strengthening of the US dollar.
Moreover, rising coronavirus cases in the country also weighed on the local unit, they said.
The rupee opened weak at 75.70 at the interbank forex market and then lost further ground to finally end at 75.73, down 64 paise over its last close.
During the day the domestic unit saw an intra-day high of 75.65 and a low of 75.80.
The country’s largest two-wheeler maker Hero MotoCorp on May 4 said it has resumed operations across three of its manufacturing plants with actual product roll-out expected to begin from May 6.
The company is commencing operations in a graded manner at three of its manufacturing plants — Gurugram, Dharuhera (both in Haryana) and Haridwar (Uttarakhand), Hero MotoCorp said in a statement.
Additionally, the company’s Global Parts Center (GPC) at Neemrana in Rajasthan has also resumed operations.
The decision comes in the wake of the relaxations put in place by the government on the countrywide lockdown and the necessary permissions granted by local authorities, it added.
Amid increased volatility in other asset classes like stocks, real estate could witness fresh interest from investors.
IANS reports: "As the coronavirus crisis hits financial markets and other investment options hard, a survey by Anarock Property Consultants shows that more and more people now want to purchase residential properties.
The survey also indicated that home-ownership is now a compelling priority for the millennials facing uncertain times.
“A majority of participants (48 per cent) in an Anarock survey to gauge housing market sentiment in COVID-19 times chose real estate as their preferred investment asset class. Of these, 59 per cent of intending buyers are end-users,” it said.
Out of the total voters favouring real estate, 55 per cent are aged between 25-35, and 68 per cent are end-users. In the H2 2019 edition of this survey, only 42 per cent were in this age bracket.
Anuj Puri, Chairman, Anarock Property Consultants, said: “The security of owning a physical asset during a coronavirus-like crisis now combines with a rising aversion to high-risk investments. As a result, the demand for residential real estate has increased.”
He noted that millennials are key demand-drivers, their preferences are now dictated by the prevailing uncertainties, stock market volatility and recent-past financial sector incidents.
Many of them now prefer buying homes over renting, Puri said, adding that the general homebuying sentiment is also guided by cheaper home loan interest rates, which currently average between 7.15-7.8 per cent."
Interesting changes are underway in the country's power sector amid the financial stress on coal plants due to the nation-wide lockdown.
IANS reports: "The coronavirus pandemic and subsequent nationwide lockdown have highlighted the growing financial risks to India’s coal-fired power plant sector, a technology being replaced by new, cheaper, and cleaner renewable energy, an IEEFA note said on Monday.
Entitled ‘Who Would Still Fund a New Coal Power Plant in India?’, the note said renewable energy delivered more than two thirds or 9.39 gigawatts (GW) of India’s new generating capacity additions in the fiscal 2019/20, while new thermal power plants delivered 4.3GW, net of the 2.5GW removed due to end-of-life plant closures.
Further, coal-fired plants today are running at half their capacity assumed in the Central Electricity Authority’s modelling guidelines used to evaluate the financial and operating performance of new coal-fired plants.
The COVID-19 pandemic and national lockdown has reduced power demand, with the casualty being coal-fired power generation.
In the first 25 days of the 2020-21 fiscal year, coal-fired power generation was down 22,300 gigawatt hours (GWh), amounting to 600GWh more than the total decline in demand during lockdown.
The note finds new domestic and international finance is backing solar, with a landmark 2GW solar tender awarded by NHPC in April 2020 priced at a near record low of Rs2.55/kWh, fixed flat for 25 years."
Related: The coronavirus outbreak has caused a “staggering” drop in global energy demand, equivalent to India’s total annual consumption: IEA https://t.co/RSc8dTbHFq
— Lisa Abramowicz (@lisaabramowicz1) May 1, 2020
Smartphone sales in India hits zero in April, May too hot to handle
The extended lockdown in India has resulted in zero shipments for the smartphone players in India in the month of April as factories are shut and it will take two-four weeks time for the manufacturing units to resume normal operations once lockdown is relaxed.
The month of March saw a steep annual decline in smartphone shipments, at 19%, due to COVID-19 nationwide lockdown from March 24.
Since then, factories are closed, retail shops are shut and online sellers are busy delivering groceries and other essential items. Result: April has seen almost zero sales.
