Trade Alert: The Independent Director Of Blackrock Gold Corp. (CVE:BRC), David Laing, Has Just Spent CA$50k Buying 250% More Shares
Simply Wall St June 7, 2020
Whilst it may not be a huge deal, we thought it was good to see that the Blackrock Gold Corp. ( CVE:BRC ) Independent Director, David Laing, recently bought CA$50k worth of stock, for CA$0.20 per share. Even though that isn’t a massive buy, it did increase their holding by 250%, which is arguably a good sign.
Notably, that recent purchase by David Laing is the biggest insider purchase of Blackrock Gold shares that we’ve seen in the last year. Even though the purchase was made at a significantly lower price than the recent price (CA$0.32), we still think insider buying is a positive. Because it occurred at a lower valuation, it doesn’t tell us much about whether insiders might find today’s price attractive.
While Blackrock Gold insiders bought shares during the last year, they didn’t sell. The average buy price was around CA$0.16. We don’t deny that it is nice to see insiders buying stock in the company. However, we do note that they were buying at significantly lower prices than today’s share price of CA$0.32. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
There are plenty of other companies that have insiders buying up shares. You probably do not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
I like to look at how many shares insiders own in a company, to help inform my view of how aligned they are with insiders. I reckon it’s a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. Based on our data, Blackrock Gold insiders have about 1.6% of the stock, worth approximately CA$475k. However, it’s possible that insiders might have an indirect interest through a more complex structure. We prefer to see high levels of insider ownership.
What Might The Insider Transactions At Blackrock Gold Tell Us?
It’s certainly positive to see the recent insider purchases. We also take confidence from the longer term picture of insider transactions. But on the other hand, the company made a loss during the last year, which makes us a little cautious. On this analysis the only slight negative we see is the fairly low (overall) insider ownership; their transactions suggest that they are quite positive on Blackrock Gold stock. In addition to knowing about insider transactions going on, it’s beneficial to identify the risks facing Blackrock Gold. To that end, you should learn about the 4 warning signs we’ve spotted with Blackrock Gold (including 2 which can’t be ignored) .
But note: Blackrock Gold may not be the best stock to buy. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies with high ROE and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
Love or hate this article? Concerned about the content? Get in touch with us directly. Alternatively, email editorial-team@simplywallst.com .
This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. We aim to bring you long-term focused analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Simply Wall St has no position in any stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
