They are wearing Charlotte Knowles' Anti Top; the piece features traditional English checks and plaids re-imagined through bleach.
While it is the same exact top - both color and style - Kylie styled it as the models wore it - with the criss-cross element of the halter laying flat and spread out across her shoulders like sleeves.
Kim, meanwhile, wore the criss-cross element scrunched in toward her neck, creating more of a defined halter neckline that highlighted her shoulders.
Night out: Kim posted the images on Wednesday afternoon to her Instagram while Kylie posted it hours later, in the evening, on her Instagram stories
Designer item: They are wearing Charlotte Knowles' Anti Top; the piece features traditional English checks and plaids re-imagined through bleach
Interestingly, Kim styled the top with the back partially unzipped, while Kylie wore it zipped all the way up in the back - as seen on the models.
Kim's half-zipped styled showcased her back, with her long ponytail tresses cleverly covering up the zipper, making it look like it was just a low-back top.
Kylie chose the matching bottoms, the Charlotte Knowles Broken Check-print high-rise flared trousers, which made the look appear seamless and more like a jumpsuit  rather than a top and matching bottoms.
Slightly different styling: Interestingly, Kim styled the top with the back partially unzipped, while Kylie wore it zipped all the way up in the back - as seen on the models
Matching: Kylie chose the matching bottoms, the Charlotte Knowles Broken Check-print high-rise flared trousers, which made the look appear seamless and more like a jumpsuit rather than a top and matching bottoms
Girls night out: Kylie filmed herself in the look while in the car with Yris, as well as at their destination while she stood up and showcased her derriere with a back view of her ensemble
Kim made it cowgirl chic by added high-waisted cream trousers with fringed detailing along the edges, adding snakeskin boots.
While Kim chose large hoop gold earrings, Kylie chose them in a more geometric shape.
Kim, who had captioned the images with a cowboy emoji, had two face framing bangs loose while Kylie opted for a slicked back bun.
Trendsetter: Kim made it cowgirl chic by added high-waisted cream trousers with fringed detailing along the edges, adding snakeskin boots
Wow: The dark haired beauty showcased her tiny waist in the corset-style top, which featured a criss-cross halter top
Kylie has long been inspired by her older sister in her fashion choices.
Kim donned a pink latex dress with clear heels on February 27, 2015 in London as she arrived to Madonna's party at Annabel's.
Three years later, Kylie donned a similar frock - although a different neckline - for a night out in West Hollywood.
Kylie donned similar clear heels like sister Kim for her September 6, 2018 night out.
Last month, the siblings had a friendly battle of the bikinis as they posted sultry swimsuit snaps just hours apart.
Kim flaunted her famous hourglass curves in a barely there leopard bikini in late May.
Hours later, Kylie tried to one up her by sporting a tiny neon green bikini in a series of racy snaps.
The siblings had been sharing a plethora of sultry snaps in a friendly sibling Instagram war.
Both sisters have taken to the social media site this summer to share steamy images of themselves amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
In the sultry snaps from May, the mother of Stormi showcased her toned abs as well as her ample cleavage in a low-cut ribbed bikini.
Mrs. West: Her oldest sister Kim Kardashian flaunted her famous hourglass curves in a barely there leopard bikini  in May, hours before Kylie shared a bikini snap
Kylie donned a sports-bra style top with high-cut bottoms that revealed her rounded hips as she posed in her luxurious pool at her new $36.5 million mansion in Holmby Hills.
The beauty added a gold watch, a large ring and hoop earrings, opting to wear her bronde tresses sleek with a braid accent on each side of her face.
Kylie painted her pout a pink hue, which perfectly matched her nails, with lightly smokey eye shadow and rosy cheeks.
Meanwhile Kim equally made jaw drop in a tiny sports-bra style leopard print top with matching bottoms, putting her famous hourglass figure on full display.
The beauty, who is a mother of four with husband Kanye West, donned a blonde wig in the images, which were snapped in her at-home gym on the stair master.
Kim cheekily labeled her images in May as 'Quarantine workout' - even going as far as wearing sneakers in the shots.
Days prior, Kim and Kylie slipped on white ensembles - both equally sultry - for a lockdown photoshoot session.
Sultry Vs Sultry: Days prior to their bikini battle, Kim and Kylie slipped on white ensembles - both equally sultry - for a lockdown photoshoot session
In early May, Kim donned a white bikini with matching chaps, adding Amina Muaddi heels; She wore her blonde wig with sunglasses while posing in front of her mirror painted Bentley.
One day after the steamy cowgirl inspired snaps Kim posted, Kylie shared a series of images while wearing only a white Naked Wardrobe bodysuit.
She added white boots with a white patterned Hermes Birkin bag.
Kylie brought the glam as well with her - also lighter locks like Kim; although Kylie actually dyed her tresses lighter whereas Kim wore a wig.
Earlier this month, Kim emulated Kylie by rocking two front bangs to frame her face for her updo for Scott Disick's 37th birthday party in Los Angeles.
Queen: Kim donned a white bikini with matching chaps, adding Amina Muaddi heels
The entrepreneur showcased her curves in the fitted number as well as giving her followers a peek at her backside in the snaps.
Kim, who recently hit 176 million Instagram followers, trails behind Kylie by six million - with the youngest sibling sitting at 182 million.
In mid-January, Kylie officially overtook Kim on the most amount of Instagram followers when she hit 156 million while her elder sibling was at 155 million.
They briefly sat at 157 million before Kylie overtook her once again - with the younger sibling now at a comfortable six million more than Kim.
Family: The siblings also each have their own makeup line but have always supported each other, including doing makeup collaborations together; pictured February 9, 2020 at the Vanity Fair Oscar Party in Beverly Hills
Share or comment on this article:
