If you’re looking to profit from gold, one potential strategy is to invest in gold stocks. Gold stocks tend to be leveraged plays on the price of gold, meaning that when gold is moving higher, they can generate fantastic returns.
In the UK, there are many gold stocks listed on the London Stock Exchange (LSE). Whether you’re looking for a large-cap FTSE 100 gold miner or an under-the-radar small-cap gold explorer, you have plenty of options. Here, I’ll provide a concise overview of some of the main UK gold stocks.
In the large-cap area of the UK stock market, there are a few companies that produce gold. One of the major players is FTSE 100 firm Polymetal International. It’s a top-10 global gold producer with a market capitalisation of £7.7bn.
Also in the FTSE 100, there’s Antofagasta and Fresnillo. Both of these companies produce gold, however, it is not the main commodity they focus on. Antofagasta’s primary focus is copper, while Fresnillo’s is silver.
In the mid-cap area of the market, there are a number of companies that are engaged in the mining of gold. One of the best known mid-caps is FTSE 250 gold miner Centamin. It’s focused mainly on mining gold in Egypt and has a market cap of nearly £2bn.
Other UK gold stocks in the mid-cap arena include Petropavlovsk and Highland Gold Mining, which are both focused on mining gold in Russia. There’s also Hochschild Mining, but it has a large focus on silver.
It’s the small-cap space that offers UK investors the most choice when it comes to gold stocks. In this area of the market, there are lots of gold stocks. Many of these are listed on the LSE’s Alternative Investment Market (AIM).
Some of the best known small-cap UK gold stocks include:
SolGold, an Australian gold and copper mining company.
Greatland Gold, which is focused on gold mining in Australia.
Chaarat Gold Holdings, which operates in the Kyrgyz Republic.
Shanta Gold, which focuses on gold in Tanzania.
Trans-Siberian Gold, which has a portfolio of gold assets in Russia.
All of these small-caps have a market capitalisation of at least £50m.
Of course, before investing in gold stocks, it’s important to understand the risks. One thing you should know about such stocks is that they tend to be volatile. While they can deliver strong returns when gold is rising, they can also deliver big losses if gold is falling.
I’ll also point out that gold mining is a complex business. There are many things that can go wrong. This means that gold stocks don’t always rise when the gold price is rising.
If you’re thinking about investing in UK gold stocks, my advice is to focus on risk as well as return. Spreading your capital over a number of different stocks is generally a smart strategy.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Edward Sheldon has no position in any shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has recommended Fresnillo. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
