Gold prices have seen a positive correlation to the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s assets, and as the Fed embarks on the largest stimulus program in its history, the yellow metal is set rally in the same fashion as in the aftermath of the last recession, said Frank Holmes, CEO of U.S. Global Investors.
“In the next three years, if we look back, if [history] repeats itself, from 2008, 2009 to 2011, that three year run saw gold go from a $750 - $800 range up to $1,900. If we forecast that because we have the same expansion of the balance sheet of the Fed then it would project, if cycles are exactly the same, gold could go to $4,000,” Holmes said. (show less)
Gold prices have seen a positive correlation to the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s assets, and as the Fed embarks on the largest stimulus program in its history, the yellow metal is set rally in the same fashion as in the aftermath of the last recession, said Frank Holmes, CEO of U.S. Global Investors.
“In the next three years, if we look back, if [history] repeats itself, from 2008, 2009 to 2011, that three year run saw gold go from a $750 - $800 range up ... (read more)
Your browser does not support inline frames or is currently configured not to display inline frames. Content can be viewed at actual source page: /news/video/latest?show=Mines--Money-Online-Connect-2020.
In response to COVID 19, Mines & Money is launching a brand new virtual event series. Mines and Money Online Connect will be the same high quality Mines and Money events that you know well, now in a virtual and online format.
Disclaimer: The content on this website, including, without limitation, news, videos, interviews and commentaries, is provided by Kitco Metals Inc. ("Kitco") for informational purposes only and is not intended as any form of advice, whether legal, accounting, investment, financial or tax advice. Therefore, it cannot be relied upon as such. Should you require such advice, contact a licensed professional. The content provided herein is provided on an "as is" basis without any warranty of any kind, whether express or implied and your use of the information provided in said content is entirely at your own risk. In no event will Kitco be held liable for any indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages arising out of the use of the content on this website.
