Sunil Subramaniam, MD, Sundaram Mutual Fund, says gold has already enjoyed the benefit and it will not look like buying equity at the highest PE rates.
When there is a war, steep inflation, when the US dollar is under pressure, which is the reserve currency for the world, gold tends to do well.
My next question is about buying gold into the portfolio . Should one buy gold?
When you look at asset allocation, gold is an important asset to be there. Gold is your ultimate haven of safety. When there is a war, steep inflation, when the US dollar NSE -0.27 % is under pressure, which is the reserve currency for the world, gold tends to do well. It is more like a safety net. In India, deposits in good quality banks have also been a safety net, because they give fixed returns. So this safety element of your portfolio should be always there.
Now it should have already been there. If it is not there, this is not the time to add. This is not the time to increase it, because in every economy in the world, every analyst has been projecting a future and predicting the bad news. Markets are already discounting that news. So gold is already enjoying the fruits of the bad news of economies, the bad news of stock markets and the bad news on crude and everything else. When you look forward from today, is that bad news going to get worse, is the world going into a deeper sea? My sense is not, because though some countries delayed their actions in responding to Covid, everybody is serious about it. And the economic impact, the way the markets are discounting, I would say it is pretty close to the bottom in terms of their bearishness about the future as an economy. In that context, gold has already enjoyed the benefit. It is actually like buying equity at the highest PE rates. Gold is in that kind of a situation. So say if you have gold, great, you have enjoyed the run. but it is not necessarily a good time to add gold today to the weightage that you already have.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
