Stock brokers have been inundated with new customers in the past two months, many of them young people keen to cash in on what may be the investment opportunity of a lifetime.
Some stock markets have fallen by more than 20pc during the pandemic and the share prices of certain companies have plummeted further still. For those already invested this spells bad news, however for anyone just starting out it presents an opportunity to buy in cheaply .
Where these young investors are choosing to put their money, however, is not what many would expect from the generation generally considered to be more eco-conscious than its predecessor.
Investment app Freetrade's user base has spiked following the coronavirus outbreak, with the average age of its customers currently 30. At the same time, the number of oil trades has also surged. Since the start of March, the number of buy orders for BP has increased 10-fold, while for Royal Dutch Shell it has gone up five-fold.
Freetrade’s Viktor Nebehaj said the uptick in oil trading was part of a wider movement among investors to take advantage of lower prices in the stock market. Shares in the oil majors lost more than 20pc of their value in March.
Aside from bargain hunting, millennials have also been rushing to invest in gold, generally considered a safe hedge to hold alongside stocks in times of economic uncertainty.  In March and April The Royal Mint reported “unprecedented demand” for gold bullion coins and bars which was increasingly coming from millennial investors .
More than 6,000 new customers opened a bullion account with The Royal Mint, around a quarter of whom were under the age of 35.  Andrew Dickey of the mint said the shift demonstrated the appeal of gold as a safe haven for all savers at this time.
Since the start of March the price of gold has increased by almost 8pc, despite a brief dip just before lockdown was announced. Over the same period the London stock market has fallen by more than 10pc.
Spyros Adamos, a business strategist living in London, has been taking the recent stock market and oil price falls as a chance to increase his holding in Shell. He started investing one year ago at the age of 29 and now has a portfolio worth £23,000.
Before the pandemic he had around £1,000 invested in the oil and gas firm; since then he has more than doubled this to £2,800 – around 10pc of his portfolio.  “I saw people were selling out of the big energy companies as the price of oil crashed. I’m a long-term investor and don’t see oil disappearing anytime soon so I decided it was a good time to buy,” Mr Adamos said.
He has been drip feeding funds into Shell over the past two months, using cash he had gained after selling his investment in BP earlier in the year. Despite his conviction in oil, he saw Shell as a safer bet. "It has better cash reserves and works more broadly across energy classes other than oil,” Mr Adamos said.
He added that, aside from the belief that Shell’s share price would recover within a few years, he was attracted by the solid dividends the company has been paying – although whether it will manage to continue doing so this year will be revealed tomorrow.
As for the ethical concerns of investing in fossil fuels, Mr Adamos said he tried not to think about it. “Oil isn’t my favourite thing. I have investments in sustainable energy companies, too.”
While millennials have time on their side to benefit from any recovery in share prices, some experts argue it would be better for younger investors to invest in smaller companies that have more potential to grow in the long-term than the ailing oil and gas giants.
Are you a young person investing for the first time? Let us know what you're buying and any questions you have in the comments below
