This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Big gold stocks Barrick Gold and Newmont Corp. have been on a tear in 2020, racking up gains approaching 40%. Citigroup raised its price targets on both stocks, but argues that only one is a Buy.
Analyst Alexander Hacking boosted his target on Barrick Gold (ticker: GOLD) to $27, from $19, and his target on Newmont (NEM) to $74 from $70. The moves, he said, stem from his firm’s upbeat expectations for the price of gold. The bank expects the metal to reach $2,000 an ounce in the second half of 2021, compared with about $1,785 on Monday morning.
The new targets reflect 1.7 times net asset value with gold trading at $1,500 an ounce—a conservative price assumption—but up from Hacking’s usual valuation range of 1.2 to 1.4 times. (Hacking’s calls on the stocks’ prices factor in more than the price of gold, looking as well at things like underdeveloped assets and related costs.)
He said that after the stocks’ big runs—Barrick is up 39.7% this year and Newmont has gained 36.8%--they don’t trade cheaply, Still, he said, “the history of gold stocks says they will trade higher with the gold price.” Citi’s 2021 estimate for gold suggests more room to rally.
More money from investors who don’t usually focus on precious metals appears to be finding its way to the sector. That tide of cash is favoring the biggest, most diversified names, a “rich get richer” kind of scenario that favors Barrick and Newmont.
Nonetheless, Hacking rates Newmont at Buy and Barrick at Neutral. “Newmont remains marginally cheaper on our net asset value models, but it’s close,” he wrote. “We see both companies in mostly good shape, with more similarities than differences.”
That means investors may ultimately chose to back one company rather than the other based on management style and capital-allocation plans. On these measures, he believes Newmont has the edge. It “seems happier to return capital and resembling a ‘Rio Tinto for gold,’” Hacking wrote. “Barrick may have bigger ambitions.”
Given the turmoil from the coronavirus and global political unrest this year, gold’s appeal has been fairly obvious. The SPDR Gold Shares (GLD) exchange-traded fund is up 16.5% year to date, while the VanEck Vectors Gold Miners ETF (GDX) has climbed 20%, The S&P 500 remains in the red.
It is no surprise, then, that Hacking isn’t the only analyst bullish on the price of gold. “Virtually nobody seems outright bearish gold, although some long-term investors have been taking profits,” he wrote.
Newmont and Barrick were down 0.1% each in morning trading, to $59.27 and $25.85, respectively.
Big gold stocks Barrick Gold and Newmont Corp.
