When prices fell an annual 0.1 per cent in April 2015 – the first time there had been negative inflation since the 1960s – there was a lot of talk of a deflationary episode.
Despite another dip into negative territory later in the year, the average inflation rate for 2015 was 0.37 per cent and deflation shambled off into the undergrowth again.
The same could be said of ‘spiralling inflation’, another elusive creature from the financial bestiary, whose imminent appearance was warned of pretty much constantly in the years following the financial crisis.
The UK inflation rate - as measured by CPIH - over the last 30 years.
Ultra-low interest rates and central banks’ quantitative easing programmes were storing up dangerous inflationary pressures in the global economy, most analysts opined – at some point she would blow.
Admittedly, inflation in the UK averaged 3.86 per cent in 2011 – high by the standards of this century - but that’s as close as we got to runaway prices, and inflation came back to heel quite swiftly.
David Coombs, manager of the Rathbone Multi-Asset Portfolio funds, believes that deflationary forces driven primarily by globalisation and the continued pace of technological innovation are of such a scale they will offset short-term risks of inflation.
'There will be some pent-up demand post lockdown certainly but I believe consumers will be looking for value more than ever and unemployment is likely to be higher and job security lower,' he says.
Other analysts reckon this time could be different.
Alasdair McKinnon who manages the Scottish Investment Trusts says the monetary ‘shock and awe’ that has been deployed by the US and other authorities against the Covid crisis is of a different degree than anything that has gone before.
Not only has it forestalled the direst scenarios that looked possible in mid-March, including that of deflation, the global response from central banks is storing up inflationary pressures.
‘There’s a lot more money swilling around,’ he says.
‘Many households are better off, even furloughed households are saving. But you can’t spend it as easily: supply chains are clogged up and capacity has been eradicated in hospitality and leisure.
'You're an independent restaurant and can only serve 10 instead of 30 people - you have to put prices up to survive. It will be a combination [after lockdown] of a wall of money in demand and restricted supply.’
But why did the last dose of quantitative easing in the wake of the financial crisis not result in runaway inflation?
He argues that there was inflation last time but largely in asset prices (the stock market and property) and under-reported sectors like healthcare and housing costs.
This has been termed the 'new stagflation' by Bill Dinning, at Waverton Investment Management: a stagnating real economy in concert with the rising price of financial assets, especially equities.
Mr Mckinnon adds that it’s not just QE now, it’s pretty much helicopter money: ‘We’re injecting money into people’s pockets, and that’s probably why there was relatively little resistance to lockdown.’
Russ Mould at investing platform AJ Bell notes additionally that the current stimulus from the Fed dwarfs what it did 12 years ago: ‘This time it has poured in $3 trillion in barely three months, whereas it added $3.2 trillion in QE stimulus in 12 years from 2008 to 2020.
Putting a number on the wider shock and awe, he adds: ‘Between [governments and central banks], over $20 trillion of fiscal and monetary stimulus has been announced with more coming nearly every week.’
Though he also observes that the money once more seems to be going to Wall Street rather than 'Main Street' - or the real economy.
He adds that monetary authorities will find it nigh-on impossible to turn the taps off: ‘The Fed and other central banks and governments never got round to withdrawing the stimulus applied in 2007-09. It has to be odds against that they get the chance or have the inclination to try too hard this time around either.
And Alasdair McKinnon concurs: ‘Economies and stock markets will probably tank if [if QE stops]. Trump has an election coming up and he’s not going to risk that,’ he says.
The power of the printing press: US Federal Reserve asset purchases and the S&P 500 index.
‘We don’t think the money spigots will be turned off: governments have backed themselves into a corner, having discovered the power of the printing press - they don't have much choice but to keep going.
With this in mind - as well as an historical inclination towards gold as a key investment asset - Mr McKinnon’s investment trust has significant exposure to the precious metal, with its top three holdings in some of the world's biggest gold explorers and miners [see factbox at end of article].
The world gold price in US dollars since 2010.
He says: ‘Gold is money you can’t just print more of. All the gold ever mined still exists, and mine output adds just 1 per cent to that total volume each year. Gold protects purchasing power and has a fairly constant value vis-à-vis various man-produced items through history.'
So, compared to modern currencies which are just fiats, backed only by government promises, it holds its value better in the face of inflation.
‘Money is not backed by anything tangible,' he concludes. 'You can just print more of it. And we’re printing a lot of money at the moment.’
While he is more worried about deflation than inflation, David Coombs -  traditionally a gold sceptic - is in agreement that it is a good time for investors to gain some exposure to the precious metal.
'Gold is a good hedge against disinflation: a valuable benefit these days considering we think we’re heading into 10 years of disinflationary headwinds. Everyone says that gold is a hedge against inflation, which it absolutely is not. It’s actually a hedge against capital destruction, which stagflation and the others do in any event.
'So, having spent years arguing the case for every other asset, these abnormal times have lead us in an abnormal direction and we’re now buying gold as a good store of value.
'With negative interest rates on various bonds, you’re actually paying some governments to lend them money. By selling these negative yielding bonds to buy gold, you are sort of increasing your income, i.e. no yield versus negative yield.'
He adds that global instability is a further factor in gold's favour: 'The US election could be very close and the outcome could be open to legal challenge – remember hanging chads? Add trade wars, Brexit, OPEC and COVID second wave and you have all the trouble you need to justify hiding in something shiny.'
Russ Mould says gold functions as a hedge against a 'loss of control' by governments and monetary authorities at a time of crippling uncertainty.
With the risk of unforeseen economic fallout from lockdown, the risk of a second outbreak, and the likelihood that authorities will feel compelled to maintain and even increase stimulus, he adds that there are worse options than gold for investors looking to diversify.
According to precious metals dealer BullionVault, the number of first-time buyers in the metals over the past three months has been running at five times the level of last year.
Over the past year, gold has performed the strongest, rising in sterling terms by some 28 per cent while silver and platinum prices have increased by 20 and 3 per cent respectively.
Investors can buy the metals in various ways. They can buy coins and bars through organisations such as Royal Mint, although 20 per cent VAT is payable on silver and platinum.
There is also a spread – anything between 5 per cent and 10 per cent – between buying and selling prices.
Alternatively, they can buy the metals that are then held in a vault, avoiding VAT in the process. Major players include BullionVault and Goldmoney.
The final route is via a stock market listed fund: one that either tracks the price of a specific metal (an exchange traded fund) or invests in a portfolio of mining company shares.
