The FTSE 100’s stock market crash may not yet be over. A weak economic outlook means that investor sentiment could decline in the coming months.
This may cause some investors to pivot from stocks to gold at the present time. They may favour the precious metal’s status as a store of wealth during a turbulent economic period.
However, the recovery potential of the stock market means that buying bargain shares now could produce high returns in the long run. As such, following Warren Buffett’s advice and buying a range of high-quality businesses today could improve your prospects of retiring early.
At the present time, the outlook for the FTSE 100 is exceptionally difficult to predict. Risks such as trade tensions between the US and China may remain high post-coronavirus, while the prospect of a second wave of the pandemic may cause sentiment among businesses and investors to deteriorate over the coming months.
As such, the gold price could outperform the index over the short term. Its track record as a defensive asset could make it increasingly popular at a time when low interest rates look set to remain in place over the medium term. This means that income-producing assets such as cash and bonds lack appeal compared to gold, thereby increasing the appeal of the precious metal among risk-averse investors.
The FTSE 100’s track record shows that positive and negative market conditions never last. Certainly, there could be a prolonged period of difficulty ahead for the world economy that weighs on stock prices. However, over time, investor sentiment and the operating environments for businesses are likely to improve. This means that stock prices are very likely to recover, which could increase investor demand for them and reduce demand for lower-risk assets such as gold.
Investors such as Warren Buffett have previously sought to purchase high-quality businesses while their futures are challenging. In doing so, they have obtained wide margins of safety that have increased their long-term return potential. By holding such companies for the long term, and waiting for their financial performances to improve and for investor sentiment to do likewise, it is possible to earn relatively high returns from the stock market.
Clearly, buying FTSE 100 shares today could mean there are paper losses ahead. However, investors with an outlook that spans years, rather than months, can use short-term market weakness to boost their chances of generating high returns from buying stocks when they are priced at bargain levels.
Such a strategy has been successful for Warren Buffett. It may not make you a billionaire, but could boost your retirement prospects and even help to bring your retirement date a step closer.
Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all fired up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the pandemic!).
But its capital-light, highly scalable business model has previously helped it deliver consistently high sales, astounding near-70% margins, and rising shareholder returns … in fact, in 2019 it returned a whopping £150m+ to shareholders in dividends and buybacks!
While COVID-19 may have thrown the company a curveball, management have acted swiftly to ensure this business is as well placed as it can be to ride out the current period of uncertainty… in fact, our analyst believes it should come roaring back to life, just as soon as normal economic activity resumes.
That’s why we think now could be the perfect time for you to start building your own stake in this exceptional business – especially given the shares look to be trading on a fairly undemanding valuation for the year to March 2021.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Growth Share… free of charge!
Peter Stephens has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
