Even though the crude price fall doesn’t get commensurately reflected in retail prices of petrol and diesel, the softening crude could still moderate India’s fuel inflation. Usually, Indian refiners keep crude inventory level for around 15 days. The big ‘inventory gains’ reported by OMCs for the third quarter of current fiscal may be absent in Q4 or they may even report losses on this account.
IOCL’s inventory gain for the third quarter was Rs 1,608 crore while the same for HPCL was Rs 343 crore.
The softening crude will of course reduce India’s oil import bill substantially. If the Indian a basket of crude averages at $35/barrel through FY21, the country’s oil import bill in the next financial year could be around $60 billion, down from estimated $106 billion in the current year.
In a more likely scenario of average price of Indian basket at $50/barrel, the imports next fiscal could be to the tune of $87 billion.
In fact, even in the current financial year, the oil import bill could turn out to be a few billion dollars lower than the estimated $106 billion, which is based on estimated average price of $66/barrel for Indian basket of crude. The average price is likely to be significantly lower (Between January 1 and March 6, the price averaged at $58/barrel).
Brent crude oil prices plummeted 31% to $31.02 on Monday morning, recording the lowest dip since February, 2016, as Saudi Arabia decided to reduce its selling prices and Russia plans to raise crude output to gain more market share in the middle of a rapidly deteriorating global demand situation. The developments have made HSBC cut its Brent price assumptions to $49/barrel for 2020, down from its previous forecast of $60/barrel. Morgan Stanley said, “while lower oil prices will translate to lower retail prices, this positive benefit will not be fully realised as the lower oil burden on consumers will likely not fully translate into higher spending in the near term as it is occurring against a backdrop of overall downdraft in the economy and financial market volatility”.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
