Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils.
Brent crude futures dropped 0.70%, to sell at $40.40 a barrel today at 4.54 am local time. The Crude oil international benchmark contract lost about 25 cents yesterday.
Strengthening concerns about global energy demand increased momentum after a surge in COVID-19 caseloads around the world led China to postpone flights and close schools.
In addition, a surge in U.S. crude inventories to a record high in two weeks, dampened oil traders’ bullish sentiments even though the U.S government data showed stockpiles for distillate and gasoline dropped.
Understanding Brent Crude; Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils. The international benchmark is used to set the price of crude oil of about two-thirds of the world’s traded crude oil including Nigeria’s crude.
“People are concerned about the coronavirus resurging in China and crude stockpiles rising,” said Lachlan Shaw, head of commodity research at National Australia Bank.
Consequently, to tackle weakened oil demand, OPEC and its major allies agreed to a record supply cut that started last month, while Nigeria and other major oil-producing countries pledged to produce less crude oil, in other to support crude oil prices. OPEC said these cuts were already serving its purpose.
“The oil market was strongly supported by a reduction of the global crude oil surplus, thanks mainly to the historic voluntary production adjustment agreement,” OPEC said, adding it saw a “gradual recovery” in demand until the end of the year.
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
Your email address will not be published.
Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils.
Brent crude gained about 0.68%, to trade at $43.08 a barrel by 5.01 am local time, after a 4.3% gain recorded in the previous week.
The implied volatility for Brent crude price has plunged to the lowest levels triggered by prices collapsing at the end of Q1 2020 as many oil traders shifted their attention to tightening oil output due to the agreement with the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and its allies.
Quick fact: Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils. The international benchmark is used to set the price of crude oil for about two-thirds of the world’s traded crude oil, including Nigeria’s crude (Bonny Light, Brass River, Qua Iboe, etc.).
Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp, in a note to Nairametrics, explained in detail the positive macros affecting oil prices. He said:
“Positive macro inflection points – most recently, the rebound in US employment – continue to support oil despite the disquieting trajectory in the US coronavirus cases.
“OPEC production, which is at the lowest level since 1991 has also been helping, both with sentiment and the fundamentals for oil.
“And while the rebalancing of supply and demand still seems to be occurring more quickly than expected, risks remain. OPEC’s planned July 15 meeting may address the possibility of once again extending the most extensive phase of the OPEC+ production cut agreement.”
Amid rising numbers of COVID-19 cases in major cities of the world’s largest economy and consumer of crude oil, a Reuters tally showed that in the first four days of July alone, 15 states in America reported upward movement in the number of new COVID-19 infections, with events over the holiday possibly triggering another upsurge.
The worsening wave of cases in major global economies strengthened concerns among cocoa traders.
At the last trading session, September Cocoa futures closed at $2,164.50.
As a result of weakening demand globally for cocoa and its substrates coupled with the present cocoa glut, as supplies outweigh demand, the price of September cocoa futures dropped to $2,159 per 1000kg, nearing a one-year low, before stabilizing above its support levels.
Globally chocolate is often classified as a luxury item, meaning, in times of high economic uncertainty like this, the consumption of such products will falter, as consumers focus more on necessity goods.
The worsening wave of cases in major global economies strengthened concerns among cocoa traders.
However, Nigeria’s leader remains optimistic recently that efforts made by fiscal stakeholders in that sector, seems to be bearing fruit, as Nigeria recorded a surge in revenue in Cocoa, year to year.
President Muhammadu Buhari said Nigeria’s revenue from cocoa and sesame seeds has increased by $79.4 million and $153 million respectively in the past year.
“Our efforts on growing non-oil exports have started to yield some results. For instance, in the past year, our revenue from cocoa and sesame seed increased by $79.4 million and $153 million,” he said.
Nigeria plays a leading role in the cocoa industry, covering a 6.5% share of the global production of cocoa.
Nigeria is also the fourth largest exporter of cocoa beans globally, behind Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, and Indonesia, according to the National Export Promotion Council. Cocoa exports in Nigeria are projected to grow annually by 4% in the coming years.
These export earnings from cocoa, if invested properly, could further help Nigeria reduce its reliance on crude oil, which makes up a large chunk of its export earnings (about 90% Est), and minimize the impact of oil price swings to its economy.
