Brent crude recovers to 90% of pre-coronavirus levels, as global demand rises
The oil market is stabilising amidst compliance of OPEC+ members with the agreement to cut oil production.
After reaching record lows of $16 a barrel in April, global crude oil benchmark, Brent crude, has seen a stable recovery around the $40 range this month.
The rising demand for brent crude was led by China, with its large appetite for oil, followed by Europe and North America. This shows a stable growing demand for crude in the coming months.
READ ALSO: NNPC GMD says recent oil price surge is cosmetic, driven by sentiments
Global oil trader Vitol expects demand to rise by 1.4 million barrels a day in June. Meanwhile, Trafigura, another multinational oil trader, says that oil demand is back to 90% of levels before the Coronavirus pandemic crashed demands – a view that Saudi’s Aramco also supports.
READ MORE: FG discloses impact of OPEC+ oil cut, how to manage post subsidy era
The oil market is stabilising amidst compliance of OPEC+ members with the agreement to cut oil production.
Trafigura’s co-head of oil trading, Ben Luckock told Bloomberg, “At $40 a barrel, we can trade a few dollars higher and a few lower. But for the first time in a few months you can see a range. The market stability is here to stay. The physical market is strong.”
Last week, Nigeria’s Vice President, Yemi Osinbajo revealed in one of the Sustainability Committee’s reports that Nigeria is expected to earn N88.4 billion monthly at an average crude price of $30.
The new oil stability around $40, which is above the sustainability committee’s benchmark, will help oil-dependent nations like Nigeria breathe a sigh of relief.
Your email address will not be published.
Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils.
Brent crude gained about 0.68%, to trade at $43.08 a barrel by 5.01 am local time, after a 4.3% gain recorded in the previous week.
The implied volatility for Brent crude price has plunged to the lowest levels triggered by prices collapsing at the end of Q1 2020 as many oil traders shifted their attention to tightening oil output due to the agreement with the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and its allies.
Quick fact: Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils. The international benchmark is used to set the price of crude oil for about two-thirds of the world’s traded crude oil, including Nigeria’s crude (Bonny Light, Brass River, Qua Iboe, etc.).
Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp, in a note to Nairametrics, explained in detail the positive macros affecting oil prices. He said:
“Positive macro inflection points – most recently, the rebound in US employment – continue to support oil despite the disquieting trajectory in the US coronavirus cases.
“OPEC production, which is at the lowest level since 1991 has also been helping, both with sentiment and the fundamentals for oil.
“And while the rebalancing of supply and demand still seems to be occurring more quickly than expected, risks remain. OPEC’s planned July 15 meeting may address the possibility of once again extending the most extensive phase of the OPEC+ production cut agreement.”
Amid rising numbers of COVID-19 cases in major cities of the world’s largest economy and consumer of crude oil, a Reuters tally showed that in the first four days of July alone, 15 states in America reported upward movement in the number of new COVID-19 infections, with events over the holiday possibly triggering another upsurge.
The worsening wave of cases in major global economies strengthened concerns among cocoa traders.
At the last trading session, September Cocoa futures closed at $2,164.50.
As a result of weakening demand globally for cocoa and its substrates coupled with the present cocoa glut, as supplies outweigh demand, the price of September cocoa futures dropped to $2,159 per 1000kg, nearing a one-year low, before stabilizing above its support levels.
Globally chocolate is often classified as a luxury item, meaning, in times of high economic uncertainty like this, the consumption of such products will falter, as consumers focus more on necessity goods.
The worsening wave of cases in major global economies strengthened concerns among cocoa traders.
However, Nigeria’s leader remains optimistic recently that efforts made by fiscal stakeholders in that sector, seems to be bearing fruit, as Nigeria recorded a surge in revenue in Cocoa, year to year.
President Muhammadu Buhari said Nigeria’s revenue from cocoa and sesame seeds has increased by $79.4 million and $153 million respectively in the past year.
“Our efforts on growing non-oil exports have started to yield some results. For instance, in the past year, our revenue from cocoa and sesame seed increased by $79.4 million and $153 million,” he said.
Nigeria plays a leading role in the cocoa industry, covering a 6.5% share of the global production of cocoa.
Nigeria is also the fourth largest exporter of cocoa beans globally, behind Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, and Indonesia, according to the National Export Promotion Council. Cocoa exports in Nigeria are projected to grow annually by 4% in the coming years.
These export earnings from cocoa, if invested properly, could further help Nigeria reduce its reliance on crude oil, which makes up a large chunk of its export earnings (about 90% Est), and minimize the impact of oil price swings to its economy.
