Brent may head towards $50 or below in worst-case scenario: Kang Wu, S&P Global Platts
While one is talking of a hit of 20% or so, for a big market like China, a 14-15 million barrels per day oil market, a 10-20% drop in demand can be huge, says the S&P Global Platts analyst.
We have been tracking the kind of impact the coronavirus scare is having on commodities globally. We want to understand from you what is happening on the demand side, what kind of hit have they taken and how much lower you see some of these prices moving?
Commodity prices are being driven lower by the demand impact right now. At S&P Global Platts, we expect the worst-case scenario to make oil demand drop by as much as a 4 million barrels a day globally in February. It is a very short period we are talking about. March will be better. In terms of prices, dated Brent is around $55 right now, and below this level, we may head towards $50 or below in the worst-case scenario. In the meantime, of course, it is a supply-demand balance issue. We see OPEC-plus taking action, and that will lend some support to prices and prevent them from going too low for too long.
While the impact of the virus is still unknown, and you do not know how long this may sustain, are we looking at one quarter of aberration in commodity prices across categories?
That is a good way to look at. However, we need another quarter as a followup. So, the first quarter this year will be worst hit, and the second quarter will be kind of a followup quarter. If somehow this virus can be contained successfully, then we may see positive results towards the end of second quarter. All indications show this one is different from SARS. For instance, the outbreak has been very fast and is increasing exponentially. There is a slight good news that the harsh measures taken by China may help prevent a long-term effect. However, there is a lot of uncertainties; and as long as this impact is there, it is most likely going to continue into the next quarter.
How are people looking at emerging markets currently?
For China itself, of course, they have to deal with the crisis. For oil companies, it has been a hard time. One thing is, they can guarantee supplies and that will maintain some of the operations. Still, the real demand is coming down.
We are talking of a hit of 20% or so. But for a big market like China, for a 14-15 million barrels per day oil market, a 10-20% decline is huge. Then independent refineries in China have really had a hard time, worse than the national oil companies, because they do not have much of the backup in terms of guaranteed supplies, guaranteed shares. So, China’s shrunken demand and refinery cuts mean demand for crude oil will be lower.
So it is a challenge for oil suppliers. For Asia and other countries, of course -- for consuming countries -- there is an opportunity to have lower prices, but the problem is the economy. The chain effect of what happened in China would show on growth in industrial production, growth in trade. At least for a period of time, for the first quarter and part of the second quarter, we are in a period of low energy prices, including oil. There might be some support for oil prices in the middle of second quarter because of seasonality and Opec actions.
We have had China infusing stimulus into the economy just the other day, and maybe this was just the first tranche and we will have more stimulus. Do you think these dips that you are seeing across commodity markets, both in crude as well as metals, could be looked at as buying opportunities?
That is a very good question. Without directly advising any investment decisions, I would say indeed after the epidemic gets over, there will be pentup demand. But of course, we are in a difficult time, mainly because the state of the economy in both China and globally are not growing very fast. We are in a slower growth mode, and China, of course, has a bigger share of everything. But the growth rate is very low.
There will be opportunities and seasonal, as well as historical, developments show when everything gets over, it will be a resumption of things. Right now the stimulus programme by China is to encourage people to travel more or do more to stimulate the economy as the virus has made people to reduce their activities. It is also to ensure that there are enough supplies for the affected areas, to at least survive this period.
