Brent crude continues to trade higher, hitting $42 after OPEC+ promise to comply with cuts
Oil prices climbed higher on Friday after OPEC+ producers promised to ensure better compliance with agreed supply cuts to offset weaker demand amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Aaran Fronda | Financial writer, London | Publication date : 2020-06-19T16:06:23+0100
Oil prices crept back above the psychological $40 mark on Friday, extending gains made over the course of this week, with the surge spurred by OPEC+ producers promising to ensure better compliance with agreed supply cuts to offset weak demand amid the coronavirus pandemic.
Brent crude is trading 2% higher at $42.38 a barrel at the time of publication, with the US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) up 3% to $40.09 a barrel.
According to a recent report by Reuters, Iraq and Kazakhstan were dragging their heels when it came to complying with the agreed production cuts. But in a recent OPEC+ panel meeting the two countries reportedly promised to ensure better compliance with the production cuts.
‘There is enthusiasm in the market that oil supply is still under control,’ Paola Rodriguez Masiu, analyst at Rystad Energy told Reuters. ‘A positive OPEC+ meeting does that and yesterday’s session helped renew confidence.’
Oil prices have made steady gains this week, helped by the International Energy Agency (IEA) increasing its 2020 oil demand forecast to 91.7 million barrels per day.
WTI has been given a significant boost following the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries' (OPEC’s) push to ensure compliance among members on output cuts, according to Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG.
‘As a result, the price has pushed back towards the highs from 8 June above $40.00, with dip buyers over the past week being rewarded for their patience,’ he added. ‘The bullish view remains in place unless we see a reversal back below $37.50.’
Despite disappointing global economic forecasts, weak demand and concerns about oversupply, analysts at Barclays raised their 2020 oil price forecast for Brent crude by $4 to $41 a barrel and believe that WTI will trade at an average of $37 this year.
However, analysts at the UK-based bank admitted that prices could fall over the near-term, with the stability of the market highly dependent on consumer behaviours.
Barclays also admitted that renewed fears over a second-wave of coronavirus cases emerging as the world begins to emerge from government-imposed lockdowns will keep prices subdued in the coming months.
‘As we mark to market our [second quarter] estimates and account for a potentially larger [second half] deficit, we raise our 2020 oil price forecasts by $4/b but remain cautious with respect to the curve over the near term,’ Amarpreet Singh, vice president of oil strategy at Barclays, said in a research note on last week.
Looking to trade the oil and other commodities? Open a live or demo account with IG and buy (long) or sell (short) shares using derivatives like CFDs and spread bets in a few easy steps:
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
1In the case of all DFBs, there is a fixed expiry at some point in the future.
See opportunity on a commodity?
Don’t miss your chance. Try a risk-free trade in your demo account, and find out whether your hunch could have paid off.
