Brent crude futures dropped on Wednesday morning trading session on growing concerns of oil glut coupled with the resurgence in COVID-19 cases around the western world, dampened investors optimism.
Brent crude was down about 1.08% to trade at $42.18 a barrel by 9.40 GMT at London’s trading session.
American government data on crude oil inventories will be released later in the day.
“Some investors took profits after the recent rally as they saw higher U.S. crude stockpiles,” Chiyoki Chen, chief analyst at Sunward Trading said.
China, the world’s largest importer of crude oil is also expected to reduce crude imports in Q3, 2020 after record crude oil purchases, as higher oil prices weaken demand and oil refiners worry about a resurgence of the worst pandemic in human history.
“Still, the market remains concerned about a rising number of coronavirus cases in the United States and elsewhere£, said Kazuhiko Saito, chief analyst at Fujitomi Co.
However crude oil remained above the $40 dollars support levels, at the world’s consumption for oil began to recover in major economies emerging from the lockdown, while a group known as OPEC+ (OPEC members, major oil allies) reduced crude oil output and U.S. shale producers closed it wells.
“We expect Brent to be traded between $35-45 a barrel for the next week as concerns over a second wave of the coronavirus pandemic will limit gains, while reduced supply from OPEC+ will lend support,” Sunward’s Chen said.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
