Brent crude surges past $40, analyst recommends investment in crude oil derivatives
Brent crude gained about 1.49%, at $40.18, 3.30 am Nigerian time – the highest level since March 6, having gained 3.3% on Tuesday.
The price of Brent crude surged on Wednesday to a near three-month high amid optimism among investors and oil traders that major oil producers will extend oil production cut, as global demand picks up.
Brent crude gained about 1.49%, at $40.18, 3.30 am Nigerian time – the highest level since March 6, having gained 3.3% on Tuesday.
A meeting by OPEC+ (a group comprising OPEC, Russia and other major oil producers) is expected to be held virtually on Thursday. The oil production cuts are currently due to run through May and June.
“As virus-related lockdown measures continue to be lifted, we expect that demand will gradually recover,” Capital Economics said in a note to Reuters, estimating that global oil consumption will fall to just under 92 million BPD on average in 2020.
(READ MORE: Brent Crude gains 23% WoW, as oil production cut kicks off)
Meanwhile, Adeagbo Adedayo Sadiq, Country Manager, Scope Markets Ltd, spoke to Nairametrics about why it’s time for Nigerians to consider investing in crude oil derivatives, as the macro fundamentals show a bullish momentum in the energy market. He said:
“Taking a closer look at Nigeria’s main commodity export, crude oil. Every day we need the energy to accomplish a lot of tasks from manufacturing down to the food we eat.
“Investing in this energy that is involved in our daily activity is very lucrative.
“As we can see that a lot of events like US/Iran face-off and COVID-19 Pandemic had an impact on the price of crude oil in the first two quarters of the year 2020.
“The oil price benchmark fell to its lowest ever in history as of March 8th, 2020, losing about 90% of its market value for the year 2020. This piece of information is very useful as an investor or to anyone who intends to trade crude oil.
“Currently the price of crude oil has risen to more than 40%. This means that if you had invested in this crude oil futures as when the price was low your investment would have appreciated at that level of gain.
“With additional production cuts announced by OPEC alongside Russia/Saudi price deal, we tend to see further upside in the price of crude oil.
“So while crude oil is appreciating in value at this period, it’s time for anyone who wishes to invest in energy trading to act now.”
Olumide Adesina a French-born Nigerian, an Investment Professional at Nairametrics Financial Advocates, owners of Nairametrics.com. 
He is a Certified Investment Trader, with more than a decade working expertise in Investment Trading.
A member of the Chartered Financial Analyst Society.
Now that we have brent at $40.18pb and  d clear indication that d economy is picking up due to easing of d lockdown due to covid -19 pandemic,what’s going to happen to exchange rate that CBN took from #305 to #360 at CBN rate making parallel market to be #445.life becoming unbearable for d populace.
Your email address will not be published.
Buhari suspends NSITF MD and other top management officials, appoints acting MD
The minister disclosed that the suspension of these officials became imperative after the preliminary investigation.
President Muhammadu Buhari has approved the indefinite suspension of the Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer of the Nigeria Social Insurance Trust Fund (NSITF), Mr. Adebayo Somefun and three Executive Directors of the Government agency over corruption allegations.
Also suspended are some other top management staff of the agency.
This was disclosed in a press statement by Charles Akpan of the Press and Public Relations of the ministry on behalf of the Minister for Labour and Employment, Chris Ngige, on Thursday, July 2, 2020.
The suspended Executive Directors are Jasper Ikedi-Azuatalam, Executive Director (ED), Finance and Investment, Mrs Olukemi Nelson, ED, Operations and Alhaji Tijani Darazo Sulaiman, ED, Administration.
Also suspended are Mr Olusegun Olumide-Bashorun, General Manager, Administration/Human Resources/Maintenance, Mr Lawan Tahir, General Manager, Finance, Mr Chris Esedebe, General Manager, Claims and Compensation, Mr Olodotun Adegbite, Deputy General Manager, Investment and Treasury Management, and Mr Emmanuel Enyinnaya-Sike, Deputy General Manager, Finance and Accounts.
The press statement also mentioned Mrs Olutoyin Arokoyo, Deputy General Manager/Acting Head, Legal, Ms. Dorathy Zajeme-Tukura, Deputy General Manager, Administration, and Mrs Victoria Ayantuga, Assistant General Manager, Internal Audit as part of the management team that was suspended.
The minister disclosed that the suspension of these officials became imperative after the preliminary investigation established prima facie infractions on the extant Financial Regulations and Procurement Act. and other acts of gross misconduct.
According to the statement, ‘’During the period of their suspension, the officers will face a Joint Board and Audit Investigative Panel that had been set up to look into the financial and procurement breaches, as well as gross misconduct in the NSITF from 2016 to date.
“The gross misconduct has invariably put the contributions of stakeholders in a perilous state. The affected officers have also been directed to hand over to the most senior officers in their respective departments.”
The statement also quoted the Minister, Chris Ngige, as directing the most senior General Manager, Dr Kelly Nwagha, to take over as the Acting Managing Director/Chief Executive with effect from Monday, July 6, 2020.
The Labour Minister also charged the Chairman of the Board, Mr Austin Enajemo Isire, to ensure that the investigative panel commenced work as soon as possible.
The NSITF has not been new to controversies as the Federal Government had alleged that N48 billion out of the N62 billion contributions to the agency was mismanaged by the former board and management between 2012 and 2015.
Some of the former officials of NSITF including the former Chairman, Ngozi Olejeme, were charged to court for corrupt practices and embezzlement by the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC).
Raising finance to acquire a marginal field? Key issues to consider – FBNQuest
The energy sector, and in particular, upstream oil and gas, remains a critical sector for Nigeria.
On the 1st of June 2020, the Federal Government of Nigeria (“FGN”) via the Department of Petroleum Resources (“DPR”) formally announced the commencement of the long-awaited marginal field bid round. According to the guidelines published by the DPR, a marginal field is defined as a field that has been discovered and left unattended for a period of not less than 10 years from the date of first discovery or such field as the President may from time to time, identify as a marginal field. The first marginal field bid process occurred in 2001 and resulted in the award of 24 marginal fields to 32 companies. Another bid round was scheduled to take place in 2013 but was subsequently suspended. In this latest bid round, a total of 57 fields located on a combination of land, swamp and shallow terrains are on offer and there has been significant interest from investors in the process thus far.
Innovative financing will be critical particularly in the context of the current low oil price environment and economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.  It is therefore important that preferred bidders understand the need to structure optimal and bankable financings for the development of the asset post-acquisition.
This encompasses the source of financing, framework and the various contracts that underpin how the financing will be availed. Reserve based lending structures, contractor financing and forward sale/prepayment structures are some forms that are likely to be utilized by prospective financiers.  A critical element in all possible financing structures and indeed most project financing type transactions is the offtake agreement. In the oil and gas industry, an off-take agreement establishes the contractual framework for the purchase and sale of oil and or gas between the seller and the off-taker. The terms of the agreements are typically negotiated before field development and will become effective upon completion of the project and production from the field commences.  This project document is quite key in ensuring the financing is secured for the project as it provides evidence that validates the financial model and cash flow projections that will underpin the asset cash flows. Offtake agreements have also become increasingly important for financing structures that involve some form of forward sale or prepayment. Lenders will seek to review the terms of the agreements as well as the creditworthiness of potential off-taker(s) and will often require that these parties either be of a specified credit rating and if not, be able to provide additional credit support (letter of credit/guarantees) to assure performance of their obligations under the agreement.  Given that this document (amongst others) contributes towards the bankability of the transaction, it is generally and in most cases made a condition precedent to the financing and will be expected to be in place prior to the disbursement of funds.  Other aspects of the financing structure which needs to be considered by prospective bidders include validation of reserves and escrow accounts, hedging requirements, defined cash waterfalls, credit enhancements from the sponsors and the inclusion of parties such as security trustee, facility agent and a technical consultant to validate the technical and operating assumptions in the financial models.
In the oil and gas industry, due diligence is critical in view of the significant quantum of investment, as well as the technical, commercial and environmental complexities which can expose parties to significant risks.  Due diligence is sure to be undertaken by prospective financiers however, the level of due diligence will largely be dependent on the type of financing that the bidder is seeking to raise, with project finance structures requiring extensive levels of due diligence. Bidders should note that although internal due diligence may have been undertaken on the intended assets, financiers will still seek to independently validate the due diligence results provided by the client.  Typically, financiers will require the services of specialists in various fields such as Technical (Surface and Subsurface), Legal, Environmental, Insurance and a Financial Model, Accounting and Tax Auditor. Due diligence in the aforementioned areas are key for project finance transactions and even more so in an upstream oil and gas deal where cash flows and repayments are based on oil and or gas reserves.
Based on the independent due diligence results, prospective financiers will seek to ensure that transaction risks have been allocated to the parties’ best placed to handle such risks.  As a bidder, it is advisable to have thought through all possible risks of the proposed transaction and work towards ensuring that risks such as geological, operational, environmental, price, regulatory risks and others are suitably mitigated. Extensive due diligence is therefore required particularly in Technical (Reserves and Associated Infrastructure) and Environmental areas. In addition, other critical requirements set out in the existing guidelines such as, evidence of technical capabilities of the management and operational teams, proposed field development plans, evacuation infrastructure etc are essential aspects of the deal which need to be taken into consideration and will be critically reviewed by prospective lenders. In spite of the current macro-economic environment, significant interest from numerous prospective investors shows that industry participants believe the process is long overdue irrespective of timing. The energy sector, and in particular, upstream oil and gas, remains a critical sector for Nigeria. It is therefore in the interest of all industry participants that the marginal field bid round process is transparent and that bids are carefully evaluated against stringent criteria to ensure that these marginal fields are ultimately awarded to firms and or consortiums with the technical capacity and financial backing required to develop and operate these assets. Finance will be a critical aspect of this process and to ensure that industry players are able to successfully attract the funding required, the above items should be carefully considered as the bid round progresses.
