Brent crude has crashed 21% to $52.3 per barrel since the beginning of the year to hit a 30-month low amid lower demand from China, which is the biggest consumer of crude oil.
New Delhi: The recent fall in crude oil prices is positive for companies in industries like oil marketing, paints, tyres, speciality chemicals, plastic piping, aviation, and cement who use crude oil as a key raw material.
Analysts say shares of companies like Astral Poly, Asian Paints, Navin Fluorine, Aarti Industries, Indian Oil, BPCL, HPCL, Atul, Sudarshan Chemical, Supreme Industries, JK Tyres, UltraTech Cement, CEAT and Finolex Industries can be accumulated to play the falling crude trend.
“Fall in crude prices is likely to be beneficial for companies in the speciality chemicals space such as Aarti Industries, Atul, Sudarshan Chemical and also for plastic piping companies such as Astral Poly Technik and Supreme Industries as it will ease the input cost pressures and enhance the gross margins,” the Economic Times quoted Rishab Bothra, senior research analyst at Sharekhan as saying. “However the same is expected to be seen with a lag effect,” Bothra added.
Worth mentioning here is that Brent crude has crashed 21% to $52.3 per barrel since the beginning of the year to hit a 30-month low. The increase in oil production in the US, Brazil, Canada and Norway and the declining demand from China, after coronavirus outbreak, is adding to the excess supply of oil. According to analysts, Brent crude is likely to stay around $50 per barrel levels until the demand outlook in China and across the world improves, which may take another 6-12 months.
“We like Astral Poly, Asian Paints, Navin Fluorine, Aarti Industries and suggest utilising these companies as investments to play this trend,” the publication quoted Sahil Kapoor, chief market strategist, Edelweiss Wealth Management as saying.
Titanium dioxide and crude derivatives form about 50% of the raw material cost of paints. As rubber accounts for 70% of total cost for the tyre industry, a meaningful fall in crude price will aid margin expansion as there is a correlation between crude and rubber prices. Cement makers could also gain as most of them have enhanced their fuel mix in favour of petcoke, whose prices, too, move in tandem with crude, the business daily mentioned.
“The sharp decline in the international crude oil price is expected to benefit oil marketing companies such as Indian Oil, BPCL and HPCL as sustained low oil prices would result in reduction in losses for refiners, which is expected to have positive impact on core refining margins and earnings,” said Abhijeet Bora, senior research analyst, Sharekhan.
Every $1fall in crude causes nearly half a billion dollar in savings for India. A 10% reduction in crude prices could reduce Consumer Price Index-based inflation by around 20 basis points (bps) and bring about a 30 bps rise in gross domestic product (GDP) growth, economists say.
