The barrel of the European reference Brent crude is forecasted to gyrate around the $40.00 mark in the longer run, according to Strategists at UOB Group’s Quarterly Global Outlook.
“Crude oil prices staged the most remarkable V shaped rebound across 2Q. From below USD 20 / bbl, Brent crude oil doubled to USD 40 / bbl. More incredible is the snap back in WTI crude oil from the deep negative price to just under USD 40 / bbl as well. Needless to say, a lot of this price rebound is due to the near-term supply discipline and production cuts from OPEC+. Amidst on-going weak global energy demand, it is imperative for OPEC+ to continue its disciplined approach. However, will OPEC+ be able to keep its act together? Or will the opportunistic partners revert back to their own ways now that crude oil prices have bounced back?.”
“We should be under no illusion that the OPEC+ production cuts can be enforced indefinitely. In addition, global energy demand remains weak. As such, we find it difficult for crude oil prices to recover further. Therefore, we forecast neutral Brent crude oil at USD 40 / bbl for coming 4 quarters.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
