Chinese stocks recorded its highest intra-day rise in a year with the CSI 300 index surging more than 5% Monday.
All major stock indices globally were green as investors pinned their hopes on fiscal stimulus and an economic recovery.
Investors shrugged off rising COVID-19 cases. The US, the world's largest economy, recorded 40,000 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday.
One analyst said: "The most hated rally in history has proven many times to be resilient and should not be underestimated.
Chinese shares saw their biggest intraday rise in a year on Monday as investors pinned their hopes on a swift economic recovery and largely ignore the continuing spread of the coronavirus in developed economies.
The CSI 300 Index of Shanghai and Shenzhen stocks surged as much as 5.7% by the close, while the benchmark Shanghai Composite was also up almost 6%.
Jeffrey Halley, senior market analyst, Asia-Pacific at OANDA, said: "Following a US holiday on Friday, Asia has shrugged off the Covid-19 clouds that dominated the weekend press and is basking in a positive start to the week."
Liquidity was thin on Friday as the US market was shut ahead of the Fourth of July celebration.
Halley added: "Hong Kong concerns are fading as fast as they began, as the new China imposed security laws allow money to talk without the annoying interference of protestors."
The surge in Asian stocks reverberated across the globe, as all major global stock indices turned green.
Here's the market roundup as of 2 p.m. London time (9 a.m. ET)
Asian indexes closed sharply higher, with China's Shanghai Composite up 5.7%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng up 3.8%, and Japan's Nikkei up 1.8%.
International oil prices rose a little. Brent crude is up 1%, while US oil, West Texas Intermediate, is virtually flat.
Gold rose 0.2% to $1,787 per ounce.
Milan Cutkovic, market analyst at AxiCorp, said: "Investors are showing renewed optimism at the beginning of the new trading week, and stock markets are set to extend gains."
"Despite facing negative headlines on a daily basis, some market participants are already dreaming about new record highs," he said.
Cutkovic added: "Whether this is achievable or not, remains to be seen, but the most hated rally in history has proven many times to be resilient and should not be underestimated.:
Naeem Aslam, chief market analyst at Avatrade, pointed out  Dow Jones futures along with S&P 500 futures have started the third quarter with a "bang" and have ignored rising COVID-19 cases.
The US, the world's largest economy recorded 40,000 new COVID-19 cases on Sunday, according to data from John Hopkins University,
