The Shanghai Composite surged to its highest level in over five years, and the Hang Seng rose nearly 4%, as a front-page editorial in China’s state-run Securities Journal said a “healthy” bull market after the pandemic is now more important to the economy than ever.
“That suggests the government is likely to do what it can to support the stock market,” said Marshall Gittler, head of investment research at BDSwiss Group.
Markets across Asia and Europe rose. The Nikkei 225 rose 1.8% in Tokyo and the German DAX gained 1.6%.
Recent economic data has also helped fuel gains. Germany on Monday reported a 10.4% gain in new manufacturing orders for May, which nonetheless was 29.3% lower than a year ago.
The stock market gains come amid rising coronavirus case loads, particularly in southern parts of the U.S.
States containing over half the U.S. population now meet one or none of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention-recommended gating criteria for reopening, point out analysts at Goldman Sachs, who separately downgraded their U.S. economic growth view for the year to a 4.6% contraction from a 4.2% downturn.
Oil wavered with the price of West Texas Intermediate crude falling 0.8% to $40.32 a barrel and the price of Brent crude climbing 0.3% to $42.92 a barrel.
Uber Technologies (ticker: UBER) shares were up 6% after the company announced it would buy Postmates in a $2.65 billion stock deal. The move to buy the food delivery service comes after attempts to acquire GrubHub (GRUB) fell through.
Dominion Energy (D) shares were down 2.4%. The move comes after Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaway (BRK.B) announced Sunday it would buy Dominion’s natural gas assets in a deal worth $10 billion, marking the Oracle of Omaha’s first major acquisition during the coronavirus pandemic. Berkshire stock was up 1.9% this morning.
Tesla (TSLA) shares jumped 6% following a bullish note from JMP Securities. The electric car maker also appeared to mock short sellers over the holiday weekend by selling pairs of red shorts on its website.
Wall Street returned from the long holiday weekend feeling bullish as U.
