Cyrus Capital advisor Jonathan Peachey told ABC AM he believed Virgin could return as a high quality, value airline aimed at both business and budget travellers.
"We do think the airline needs to simplify, that does mean that the airline will need to become a little bit smaller," Mr Peachey said.
"What I can say is that we're working to preserve as many jobs as possible.
"In the event there do need to be job losses, Cyrus Capital has committed to cover employee entitlements as part of any deal."
Mr Peachey denied that Cyrus was planning to "flip" the airline, other words, sell it off as soon as possible to make a profit.
Cyrus Capital advisor Jonathan Peachey says Virgin can return as a high quality, value airline aimed at both business and budget travellers.
The Federal Government's travel ban, imposed in late March because of COVID-19, has, not surprisingly, seen a record fall in overseas trips for Australian travellers, according to new figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
The ABS said the number of Australians returning home from abroad fell 98.1 per cent in April compared to a year earlier.
ABS director of migration Jenny Dobak said 17,000 Australians returned home over the month, compared to 916,400 over the same time last year.
She said tourist arrivals fell 99.7 per cent in April with just 2,200 people arriving in the country.
In contrast, 700,400 short-term arrivals were recorded in April last year.
New South Wales has the most returnees over the month, with 5,700 trips, a 98.2 per cent slump from the 310,700 who returned home in April last year.
People uncomfortable about attending large gatherings: ABS
Other data shows that three out of five Australians are looking forward to larger gatherings of family and friends and eating out at restaurants or cafes as coronavirus restrictions ease.
However, more than three in four people surveyed were uncomfortable about attending large public events.
ABS program manager for household surveys, Michelle Marquardt, says the level of comfort felt by people in returning to their usual activities varies.
ABS program manager for household surveys, Michelle Marquardt, said the level of comfort felt by people in returning to their usual activities varied.
"The vast majority of working Australians, 86 per cent, were at least somewhat comfortable in resuming their usual attendance at the workplace, and of those with children, 81 per cent were at least somewhat comfortable with sending their children back to school or childcare," she said.
However, 76 per cent of those surveyed were uncomfortable about attending large public events and 66 per cent said they were worried about indoor gatherings with more than 100 people.
Ms Marquardt said most people were unwilling to fly on a plane or travel by public transport.
"Although restrictions were gradually easing, social distancing was still being observed, with 95 per cent of Australians continuing to keep their distance from people outside their household and 79 per cent avoiding social gatherings with people who do not live with them," she said.
This is the Bureau's fifth survey on the household impacts of COVID-19.
A National Australia Bank survey of 2,000 people about coronavirus found that almost one in six Australians said the impact of the pandemic on the economy was their biggest concern, aside from health.
The survey was conducted in the last week of May, amid states and territories easing social-distancing restrictions and reconsidering domestic travel bans.
