US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude fell 72 cents, or 1.8 per cent, to $38.83.
Brent crude was down 65 cents, or 1.5 per cent, at $41.65 a barrel by 1400 GMT.
LONDON: Oil slipped on Monday after Saudi Arabia said that an extension of output cuts by Opec+ nations would not include additional voluntary cuts by a trio of Gulf producers.
Brent crude was down 65 cents, or 1.5 per cent, at $41.65 a barrel by 1400 GMT, while US West Texas Intermediate ( WTI ) crude fell 72 cents, or 1.8 per cent, to $38.83.
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, Russia and other producers - a group known as Opec+ - agreed in April to cut supply by 9.7 million barrels per day (bpd) in May and June. They agreed on Saturday to sustain those cuts through July.
After the extension was agreed, top exporter Saudi Arabia increased its monthly crude prices for July.
However, Saudi energy minister Prince Abdulaziz bin Salman told a news conference on Monday that the kingdom and Gulf allies Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates would not cut by an extra 1.18 million bpd in July as they are doing this month.
Those cuts were in addition to the 9.7 million bpd Opec+ plan.
"It would be too good to be true to have a total of nearly 11 million bpd in voluntary cuts extended for a month at times when we see supply deficits," said Bjornar Tonhaugen at Rystad Energy.
Low prices have prompted Chinese buyers to boost imports, with purchases by the world's largest crude importer hitting a record high of 11.3 million bpd in May.
But consultancy JBC Energy warned that higher prices could discourage buying and undercut a fragile recovery in demand.
"We cannot shake the feeling that, price-wise, this market has gotten a bit ahead of itself and will need a good confluence of bullish surprises to continue in order to maintain current pricing levels," JBC said in note.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
