Dow Jones Futures: Trump’s Response To Protests Plunges Approval Rating, Stock Market Rally Unshakable; Brent Oil Tops $40
Dow Jones futures are up despite the on-going riots, looting, and several nights of chaos in the U.S. The Dow Jones industrial average futures today are trading higher by over 100 points while the gold price remains weak, currently trading at $1,721. Speculators do believe that gold could skyrocket if the slogan “#Trumpdictatorship”, a highly popular and trending hashtag on Twitter yesterday, becomes a reality. This could happen if Trump calls for the full force of the U.S. military to crush riots.
The Dow Jones index closed higher yesterday, scoring gains of 267 points. The S&P500 index jumped by 0.82%, and the Nasdaq
index went up by 0.61%. Investors are primarily focused on the reopening of the US economy and continue to bank on better economic growth.
This comes at a time when the S&P500 futures show that bears are holding the biggest short positions on the U.S. stocks since 2015. This could certainly make the price action a lot uglier in the coming days.
A National Mask Mandate Could Save The U.S. Economy $1 Trillion, Goldman Sachs Says
In Trump news today, the U.S. President, Donald Trump is facing a tremendous and most significant challenge to restore law in the U.S. after several nights of chaos, riots, and looting. The latest event was triggered after this Trump tweet. The incident has prompted bipartisan condemnation from Democrats and Republicans. Not even one Republican governor publicly said yes to Trump’s invitation of sending the military to crush the on-going riots and looting for fears that it would only make the situation worse. Images of police utilizing tear gas and flash-bang devices to disperse protesters before the president walked to the church photo-op also adversely impacted his public support.
Trump’s rating is slipping away ahead of the upcoming presidential election, according to a recent poll by Monmouth University. Trump’s approval rating fell to 42% from the previous level of 46%. The public is losing its trust over Trump handling the coronavirus pandemic. Yesterday’s show of force combined with strong words from the president only triggered more protests in Washington, DC, and other cities.
This crisis made the likely Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden seize the opportunity at hand. In Philadelphia, Biden condemned the president’s move of mudslinging and reminded Trump, “we are all called to love one another as we love ourselves.”
Brent and Crude oil prices have surprised investors since the rally took off when the crude oil’s June contract went negative for the first time in history. At the time, few investors imagined that Crude and Brent oil prices would recover this fast. But the naysayers were wrong, as Brent oil prices have reached a high of $40.53. It’s up another 1.84% today, and Crude oil soared by 2.74%, with the last price at $37.84.
Speculators are betting that the recent agreement between the OPEC+ t o curtail the oil supply will be extended by another 1 to 3 months. Russia has previously voiced reluctance to extend the supply cut. However, it has shown willingness to extend the production along with several other nations.
Traders will also be tracking the upcoming crude inventory data that is due later today. The American Petroleum Institute reported a decline of 2.2 million in stockpiles at the storage hub in Cushing. The forecast for today’s crude oil inventory data is +3.0M, while the previous reading was 7.9M.
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have
I was awarded a national award (Young Irish Broker) in 2010. I have worked with Bank of America in equity trading and with Bank of New York in hedge fund trading, I have a wealth of knowledge from trading in the financial markets which spans over 10 years and specialize in forex, commodities and equities. I frequently partake across all major tier one media channels such as CNBC and Bloomberg discussing investment strategies around major macroeconomic and political events. I have often participated in panel discussions on notable events across the globe. More recently, during the Brexit referendum, I predicted the crash in sterling against the dollar to a level of 1.18 in an interview with MarketWatch. I also called the bottom in Crude oil when it was trading near $25 with numerous print and digital financial media outlets. I have also worked  with top UK universities to give lectures and delivered an investment and trading course at the London School of Economics.
