Gold and Brent crude gain ground, yet sharp declines for havens could see gold turn lower once again.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-08T10:39:13+0100
Gold saw sharp losses through the backend of last week, with the precious metal falling into the $1671 support level.
The rebound we are seeing currently looks like a potential retracement before we turn lower again, with a break through the $1721 threshold required to negate the bearish trend that has been playing out over recent weeks. With that in mind, while we could see short-term upside, it is worthwhile watching the 61.8% and 76.4% Fibonacci resistance levels for a potential bearish reversal.
Brent has been on the rise once again today, with the weekend agreement to extend the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries+ (OPEC+) cuts providing a gap higher at the start of trade.
Much of this has been expected, therefore, we are failing to see much follow through as things stand. Whether this ascending trendline will lead to a short-term pullback or not remains to be seen. However, in either case, it seems likely we will see further upside before long, with a break below $38.79 required to negate this bullish trend.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
1In the case of all DFBs, there is a fixed expiry at some point in the future.
