The price of gold is on the rise as mark sentiment sours, while Brent declines into trendline support.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-09T10:00:03+0100
Gold is looking to extend its rebound as the stock market turns lower in early trade.
Last week's break below the $1689 support level points towards the possibility of us currently trading within a retracement phase. However, with market risk appetite waning, we could see further upside as we move towards the 76.4% resistance level. The reaction to that level will be key, with a rise through $1709 raising the possibility of a rally into the key $1721 resistance level. Ultimately we would need to see that level overcome to bring about a wider bullish trend once more.
Brent has managed to turn lower from trendline resistance following yesterday’s gap higher.
The subsequent pullback has brought about a move into another ascending trendline, with a break below this point signalling a possible continuation of the decline. However, we will ultimately require a drop below $38.79 to signal the beginning of a more bearish or neutral phase for Brent.
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Trade commodity futures, as well as 27 commodity markets with no fixed expiries.
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
