Gold and Brent crude turn higher, as risk sentiment takes a turn for the better.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-16T10:33:58+0100
Gold has managed to rebound back towards the 76.4% Fibonacci resistance level as stock markets take a more positive turn. Ultimately we need to see a break through the $1743-$1744 resistance zone to bring about a bullish breakout signal.
Until then, there is a chance we could roll over to continue the trend of the path of lower highs that has been in place throughout the past month. As such, the ability to reverse lower or break through this 76.4% Fibonacci level at $1734 will tell us a lot about where we go from here.
Brent has been regaining ground after the drop into 61.8% Fibonacci support at $37.51. The subsequent rally has taken us through the notable $39.55 level, completing a double bottom formation and potential uptrend continuation.
A break through the $42.08 level would provide a more reliable bullish signal to end the trend of lower highs. As things stand, the potential for another turn lower remains a key concern until that level is overtaken.
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Trade commodity futures, as well as 27 commodity markets with no fixed expiries.
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
