Gold and Brent crude both break key resistance, but crude prices are starting to show signs of a potential short-term pullback.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-24T10:04:53+0100
Gold managed to break through the $1765 resistance level yesterday, bringing about a fresh seven-year high for the precious metal.
We are now looking up towards the $1796 peak from 2012 as the next historical resistance level of note. With the price having respected that $1796 breakout level as new support, further upside looks likely, with a break from the recent trend of higher lows required to negate this bullish outlook (currently at $1765).
Brent crude has been on the slide since yesterday’s peak, with the price dropping below trendline support.
Despite that bullish break through the $43.43 resistance, this decline could lead to a bearish phase if we continue to break key support levels. To the downside, watch $41.84 support as the first major level that could signal further downside if broken. While downside could come into play if we do break below near-term support, it is worthwhile noting that such weakness would be deemed to be short term in nature as the price retraces the rally from $37.13. To the upside, a break back through the $43.95 brings about a fresh bullish signal.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
1In the case of all DFBs, there is a fixed expiry at some point in the future.
