Gold and Brent crude have started to turn higher following yesterday’s declines and OPEC rumours.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-04T11:01:26+0100
Gold managed to break below the key $1694 level yesterday, with the price slumping into the lowest level since early May.
We are currently in recovery mode, with overnight gains being followed up this morning. The brief pullback could give us a short-term higher low, with a break through $1705 key to building a more long-standing rebound. However, there is a good chance we will see the price turn lower again given the recent breakdown. As such, watch for a break below the most recent swing low (currently $1698) to highlight a return of the bearish picture. Until then, a break through $1705 could bring short-term relief for the bulls.
Brent crude turned lower yesterday after rumours surfaced over a potential breakdown in relations at the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) that could signal a failure to agree an extension to the production cuts today.
However, we have since stabilised, with the price turning higher after an evening of consolidation. As such, the bullish trend remains intact unless the price breaks below yesterday’s low of $38.79. The fact that we have managed to remain above that level this morning points towards a likely move higher from here.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
1In the case of all DFBs, there is a fixed expiry at some point in the future.
