Gold and Brent crude both look set for further upside, with key resistance levels broken.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-02T10:30:44+0100
Gold is weakening in the wake of a failed attempt to break through the $1745 resistance level. Given the previous rise through $1740 resistance, this looks to be the beginning of a resurgence for the precious metal.
However, the fall back into $1727 support points towards the possibility of a short-term pullback. Should that occur, there is a chance we could see the price of gold fall back in the short term. Whether we see that retracement of the $1694-$1745 rally will depend on whether we break below $1727 ­or not. Either way, this current weakness is likely to be a short-term phenomenon and precursor to further upside. As such, a bullish outlook is in play, with a rise back into the $1765 peak likely before long.
Brent crude is currently trading at the highest level since 11 March, with the recent rise through $38.23 providing us with another period of consolidation overnight.
This is a likely precursor to further upside, with the short-term uptrend likely to continue until we see the price break below the previous swing low. As things stand, a break below $37.19 would be required to negate this bullish trend. Until then, further upside seems likely for Brent.
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Trade commodity futures, as well as 27 commodity markets with no fixed expiries.
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
