Gold starts to turn higher after recent weakness, while Brent crude breaks key support.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-05-22T09:30:30+0100
Gold weakness seen over the course of the past few days always looked like a retracement of the rally from $1692 despite the secondary leg lower seen on Wednesday and Thursday. This ABC style retracement has taken us into the 61.8% Fibonacci support level, with gold heading higher as we head towards the weekend.
A break below the $1692 level would bring about significant questions over the possibility of a wider pullback. Until then, a bullish outlook is in play for gold.
Brent gains in the lead-up to the June contract end seem to have taken its toll, with the price breaking back below the $34.39 level this morning. That could bring further downside as we start to retrace the wider $29.24-$37.11 rally.
Quite how deep such a retracement will go remains to be seen, yet further downside does look likely now that we have broken the $34.38 level. A rally back up through $37.11 would signal a continuation of the recent bullish trend. ​
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
1In the case of all DFBs, there is a fixed expiry at some point in the future.
See opportunity on a commodity?
Don’t miss your chance. Try a risk-free trade in your demo account, and find out whether your hunch could have paid off.
