For traders News and features Features How to invest in oil with little money? Your top 5 options
High volatility makes predicting oil prices extremely difficult. Still, the US Energy Information Administration tries to do their best. According to the latest EIA’s short-term energy outlook , Brent oil prices will average $67 per barrel and WTI crude oil prices will average $62-$63 per barrel for the rest of 2019 and 2020.
If forecasts are to be believed, global demand will boost oil prices to $92 by 2030, to $105 by 2040, and to $107 per barrel by 2050. All signs suggest that oil won’t lose ground and will draw investors’ attention over and over again.
Serving as the no. 1 most-traded commodity worldwide, oil remains one of the major economic drivers. If you’re thinking of oil investing, you’re definitely not alone. The good thing with oil is that you can invest in the oil industry in several different ways without actually taking delivery of it. So, what’s the best way to invest in oil? Let’s choose the one that suits your goals.
Considered one of the most direct ways of trading commodities without buying actual barrels, future contacts are purchased through commodity brokers. Buying futures, you buy a contract to purchase oil at a specified future date at a predetermined price.
As most people don’t have storage facilities and proper distribution channels, trading oil futures is what we usually think of when we talk about oil investments.
The key specs on trading the two most popular oil benchmarks – WTI and Brent crude – through futures contracts are the following:
Oil futures are the most-traded futures on the market, which makes them extremely liquid. However, oil futures are extremely volatile as it’s very difficult to predict further oil price movements.
Contracts for difference is one of the most popular ways to invest in oil with little money. Speculating on the oil price difference between opening and closing the trade, you don’t actually buy oil itself.
One of the major advantages of CFD trading is leverage. For example, if your CFD broker offers you a 10% margin on oil trading, it means you have to deposit only 10% of the total value of the trade you want to open, and the rest is covered by your CFD provider. Therefore, if you’d like to open a position for $1,000 worth of crude oil, you actually need only $100 as the initial amount to open this trade.
Furthermore, CFD trading often doesn’t require any commission, as CFD brokers profit from a spread.
Another advantage of CFD trading is its flexibility. While a standard oil future contract is for 1,000 barrels, CFD allows to trade much smaller sizes. For example, you can place a CFD order for 25 barrels.
That said, since CFDs are a leveraged product, the risk of losing all your invested capital is magnified.
Another way to invest in crude oil is through trading oil stocks. In this case, you should not only follow global oil prices, but also to delve deeper into the production potential of a certain oil company.
Understanding the full energy cycle and the competitive landscape, as well as estimating the companies’ financial performance, will help you to distinguish valuable trading assets.
The list of major players in the crude oil production market includes the following companies:
