This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Updated April 21, 2020 3:56 pm ET / Original April 21, 2020 1:46 pm ET
Oil prices staged a dramatic rally on Tuesday—after going negative on Monday. But shares of the biggest oil exchange-traded fund tumbled amid growing concerns about the ETF’s very survival.
The United States Oil Fund (ticker: USO), holding $3.1 billion in assets, was down more than 22% on Tuesday, to around $2.80 a share, despite a 124% rally in the spot price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil, to about $9 a barrel. Shares of USO are down 77% for the year. Trading in the ETF was briefly halted around 2 p.m.
The ETF was down even more earlier in the day, but the fund’s sponsor, United States Commodity Funds, took some measures that may have helped stabilize the shares. USCF said it would now hold 40% in June contracts for West Texas Intermediate Crude, 55% in July contracts, and 5% in August contracts, according to a securities filing .
Essentially, USO is now spreading its bets further into the future, rather than trying to track the spot price of the commodity.
“As a result of these changes, USO may not be able to track the Benchmark Futures Contract or meet its investment objective,” which is to track the daily change in the spot price of oil, the fund’s sponsor said in a filing.
USCF also said it had suspended issuing new shares of the ETF. That may also be adding to the ETF’s volatility and causing its share price to diverge sharply from its underlying holdings, making the ETF trade more like a closed-end fund (at a premium). Shares traded at an 8% premium to NAV on Monday.
A spokesperson for USCF declined to comment in an email to Barron’s.
Oil futures have dipped into unprecedented territory: Contracts for May delivery went negative on Monday. A barrel of WTI oil strangely closed at -$37.63, indicating that suppliers were essentially paying buyers to take oil off their hands.
The technical glitch occurred because oil depots in the U.S. and other parts of the world are getting so full that storage capacity has become a growing concern. Speculators appeared more willing to take a loss on the futures contract than take actual delivery of oil in May.
The June contract—40% of the ETF’s assets—has not gone negative, but it was down more than 36% in trading on Tuesday, to around $13.10 a barrel. The contract is facing heavy pressure by short sellers betting they may be able to push it into negative territory. That is pressuring the underlying holdings of USO since it holds June contracts and contracts expiring in July (along with 5% in August contracts). The fund didn’t hold any May contracts as of Monday’s closing-day holdings.
Could the ETF survive if the June contract goes negative? Possibly, but strains are mounting. The ETF’s futures holdings represents 30% of the June contract open interest, according to Charlie McElligott, managing director of cross-asset macro strategy at Nomura Equities.
“There is certainly a scenario where if June futures were to also go negative, then USO would be ‘lights out’ as a partnership and could actually ‘owe’ money,” he wrote in a note published Tuesday.
Prices of WTI and Brent crude (the global benchmark) are collapsing in unison, he noted, because “there is nowhere to put the stuff (storage tanks, pipelines, supertankers are all full).”
Moreover, the lack of storage is raising questions about the very utility of oil futures contracts.
“Because market participants believe things won’t be getting much better into the future either—and without storage, since you cannot take physical delivery—then what is the ‘utility’ of the futures contract itself?” he writes.
USCF has not given any indications that it plans to liquidate the USO ETF. Investors in the ETF wouldn’t owe money if it does go under. And there is, in theory, at least, an orderly liquidation process.
The fund’s sponsor would file with the SEC to delist shares at a date in the future. Investors could then choose to sell shares in advance or receive a payout on the liquidation date, based on the fund’s underlying net asset value, according to Justin Young, co-founder of Volatility Shares, an ETF sponsor.
Yet liquidating a fund as large as USO could be highly disruptive to the oil markets, given its significant exposure to futures contracts, and it may well drive down prices further.
Moreover, the fund holds Treasury bills and other cash securities as collateral for its futures contract. Those cash holdings amount to a third of the fund’s net asset value. If futures contracts go negative or wind up nearly worthless, the fund may face margin calls on its cash and could wind up in the red.
That may be a worst-case scenario. And we may well see a recovery in oil prices. For now, though, investors who speculate on the price of oil through the USO ETF are playing with fire.
Oil prices staged a dramatic rally on Tuesday—after going negative on Monday.
