5 min read . Updated: 16 Mar 2020, 12:15 AM IST Pallavi Pengonda
Mumbai: When the going gets tough, tough measures get going. With major cities and trading centres across the globe putting restrictions on travel, and some in lockdown mode, economic activity is expected to slow down at a fast clip. This worry is paramount in the minds of investors, as the impact of a prolonged slowdown will be far greater than the benefit for India from lower crude oil prices. The country imports more than 80% of its oil requirements.
The price of Brent crude had already dropped from $66 a barrel on 31 December to $45 a barrel on 6 March owing to concerns on demand. But with the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and allies failing to reach a consensus on supply cuts, a price war triggered a further drop to about $34 per barrel.
Lower crude prices have a positive impact on India’s current account deficit and inflation. But, the simultaneous impact of Covid-19 changes the landscape, with nobody being sure if things will progressively improve or deteriorate hereon.
“In the unfortunate event that the coronavirus situation worsens, the gains to India from the sharp crude price drop may well be offset by the demand destruction that would occur due to slowing economic activity," said Ritesh Jain, a global macro investor and market observer . “Plus, if crude oil prices sustain lower for a longer period of time, remittances from the Middle East will be hit, eventually resulting in unemployment of millions of Indians employed in the region," added Jain. These factors are ultimately poised to take a further toll on India’s economic growth.
“Notwithstanding the macro gains from lower crude oil price, if the Covid-19 outbreak is not contained over the next 4-6 weeks, we believe the economic weakness in India could get intensified to 4.6% in case of intermediate pandemic case or drop to 4% in case of severe pandemic case versus 5.1% year-on-year estimated growth currently for FY21," said Tanvee Gupta Jain, an economist at UBS Securities India Pvt. Ltd.
Against this backdrop, what does the mix of lower crude oil prices and Covid-19 mean for various sectors?
1) Aviation: Aviation turbine fuel forms a huge chunk of the operating costs of airlines, which means lower crude prices help profits. But what good are lower oil prices when demand is low? Covid-19 fears have already led to cancellation of many conferences and meetings. Accordingly, one can expect passenger load factors and fares to remain subdued. Unsurprisingly, shares of InterGlobe Aviation Ltd and SpiceJet Ltd have shed 25% and 61% so far in 2020. SpiceJet’s higher operating leverage and relatively weak financial health means sentiments have remained much weaker for it than bigger rival, InterGlobe.
2) Automobiles: It is a mixed bag for the automobile industry. “We expect falling fuel prices to provide support to automobile volumes through lower cost of ownership; lower fuel prices impact cost of ownership more than lower interest rates," Kotak Institutional Equities said in a report on 11 March. On the flip side, Covid-19 poses some risks. Analysts from Jefferies India Pvt. Ltd wrote in a report on 9 March, “Supply chain issues could impact production for Indian auto companies although incrementally supplies are easing; Global OEMs such as Tata Motors are facing demand issues."
3) FMCG: Prima facie, fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) companies such as Hindustan Unilever Ltd are expected to benefit from lower crude prices due to relief on raw material and packaging costs front. Analysts expect FMCG companies to retain the input cost benefits, which should aid margins. Revenues for consumer companies, especially the ones with strong brands and distribution, are expected to perform relatively well, as demand for staples is expected to be impacted less from the slowdown. Consumer stocks have fallen the least in the recent market sell-off.
4) Retail/multiplex: While the impact of lower crude prices is limited for retailers, revenues are likely to take a knock, as footfalls in shopping malls fall. In general, people may opt to stay indoors to protect themselves from the virus. Meanwhile, lower footfalls and delay in movie releases would drag down profits of multiplex firms such as PVR Ltd and Inox Leisure Ltd. Stocks of retail companies and multiplex firms have fallen sharply in the past month. Shares of PVR have fallen 37% from its highs in February.
5) Telecom: Telecom companies may be the only major industry to report a strong growth in profits in the next fiscal, riding piggyback on tariff hikes taken last December. There is also talk of a further increase in tariffs after the industry regulator allows a floor price for mobile services. The spread of Covid-19 isn’t expected to impact volumes of telcos.
6) Pharmaceuticals: India’s pharma companies are largely expected to be impacted by the supply chain disruption in China owing to the pandemic. However, with things gradually improving in China, the impact isn’t expected to be severe. The general increase in precaution and health-related concerns can aid sales of some pharmaceutical products.
7) Cement: The cement industry should benefit from lower crude prices, as petcoke prices decline. Freight costs, too, can be expected to reduce, which can aid margins of cement companies.
8) Capital goods: Within the capital goods sector, exposure to the Middle East is a negative for Voltas and Cummins, said Jefferies’ analysts. Exposure to the Middle East is negative for Larsen & Toubro Ltd (L&T) as well. With hopes of a rebound in economic growth being dashed due to the spread of the virus, sentiment for these stocks has fallen further. Shares of L&T have fallen 23% from their highs in end-January.
9) Oil companies: Oil producers such as Oil and Natural Gas Corp. Ltd (ONGC) and Oil India Ltd will take a hit on their price realisations, which will impact profits. ONGC shares are now at a 16-year low. On the other hand, state-run oil marketing companies are expected to benefit, with refining and marketing margins getting a boost from lower procurement costs. However, Covid-19 may adversely impact demand, so some of the benefits from improved margins may get negated. Reliance Industries Ltd’s deleveraging plans by selling a stake in its oil-to-chemicals business to Saudi Aramco are expected to be impacted, given the impact of lower crude prices on the latter.
10) Paints: One of the biggest beneficiaries of lower crude prices could be paint companies, as a big share of their raw materials are crude-linked. The impact of Covid-19 on demand is not clear yet. Shares of Asian Paints have been the most resilient among Nifty stocks this year.
To be sure, the extent of the damage on overall demand depends on how severe Covid-19 gets. For now, investors can breathe a sigh of relief that lower oil prices softens the blow to some extent.
* Thank you for subscribing to our newsletter.
Click here to read the Mint ePaperLivemint.com is now on Telegram. Join Livemint channel in your Telegram and stay updated
