Rolling coverage of the latest economic and financial news, as attack on Saudi Arabia’s Abqaiq oil facility rocks markets
An Aramco oil facility near al-Khurj area, just south of the Saudi capital Riyadh.
Finally, the oil future market has closed with the sharpest jump in prices on record.
At least for Brent crude, which ended the day up 14.6% at $69.02 - the biggest percentage gain in record.
US crude oil also soared, ending the day 14.7% higher at $62.90.
The attack in Saudi Arabia sent traders scrambling to buy oil contracts, especially with Donald Trump warning that America is ready for war.
“We have the strongest military in the world.” In response to the recent attacks on Saudi oil facilities, Trump says that he does not want to go to war, but the U.S. is “prepared more than anybody.” https://t.co/jfCmxoczWH pic.twitter.com/MLVsbckwhS
Economists are fearing weeks of disruption, possibly running into months, if Saudi can’t get the Abqaiq facility back online soon -- or if the tensions between the US and Iran escalate.
As Saul Kavonic, an energy analyst at Credit Suisse, put it:
We have never seen a supply disruption and price response like this in the oil market. Political-risk premiums are now back on the oil-market agenda.
That’s all for tonight! Thanks for reading and commenting. GW
Over at the White House, Donald Trump has said he hopes to avoid conflict in the Middle East:
Trump said in the Oval Office that the attacks on Saudi oil facilities are being studied but “it’s certainly looking” looking like Iran was responsible.
He added that he’d “certainly like to avoid” war, but the military is prepared — and the Saudis would have to contribute $. pic.twitter.com/UaqEOzPEBQ
Pres Trump says it looks like Iran was responsible for the weekend attack on Saudi oil facilities. "We’ll let you know definitively. ... That’s being checked out right now," he told reporters at start of meeting with the Crown Prince of Bahrain. (Pool photo by @AprilDRyan ) pic.twitter.com/rpRc1akVKS
Here’s a neat explanation of how a higher oil price could lead to faster inflation and slower global growth:
The world urgently needs competent leadership before the crisis in the Middle East boils over, writes foreign affairs commentator Simon Tisdall.
He’s particularly critical of the US administration, whose tearing-up of the Iran nuclear deal has escalated tensions in the region, and pushed Tehran into a corner:
Warning bells, akin to those used to alert fog-bound mariners steering towards rocks, have been ringing out for months.
They have mostly been ignored. The daunting bill for multiple acts of political insouciance, measured in lives and petrodollars, is now coming due.
Britain’s FTSE 100 index of blue-chip shares has closed 46 points lower at 7,321 points, a drop of 0.6%.
Stocks wilted in the face of concerns that escalating tensions in the Middle East will hurt global growth, and that higher oil prices will curb consumer spending on other item.
Financial group Prudential led the fallers, down 3.3%, on fears of lower growth in its Asia-Pacific markets.
My colleagues Richard Partington and Jillian Ambrose have written about today’s oil spike:
The Saudi oil attacks have triggered the steepest petroleum market price surge in 30 years and stoked fears for the global economy.
The attacks on Saudi Arabia’s oil infrastructure led to the biggest jump in global prices since 1988 by wiping out 5.7m barrels of production a day – 5% of the world’s oil supply.
The price of Brent crude surged by more than $12 (£9.60) a barrel within seconds as trading began in London, quickly breaching the $70 a barrel mark.
The energy price shock reverberated through global markets, driving up shares in energy companies on the prospect of higher profits, while stock exchanges across Europe plunged into the red as investors took fright over rising geopolitical tensions.
Oil market analysts claim prices could surge towards $100 a barrel in the coming weeks if Middle East tensions reignite disruption in the strait of Hormuz , a key transit route for the world’s oil tankers.
A Middle East energy crisis could be a boon for US shale producers, but threatens to tip the stumbling global economy into a major recession by stemming supply to Asian economies.
Donald Trump said the US was “locked and loaded” to retaliate and could authorise the release of US oil reserves to help balance the market. But energy experts cast doubt on whether US fracking companies would be able to fill the gap left by Saudi oil production plants.
Bjørnar Tonhaugen, the head of oil markets at Rystad Energy, said the world was “not even close” to being able to replace Saudi exports.
