Yet as the world moved into the 90s, a sleeping giant emerged: China. For the world’s most populous nation, demand growth for oil was unprecedented.
Brent crude was shipped to China, and because U.S. oil demand growth was smaller and China more dramatic, the Brent contract started to have a more assertive role in setting global oil prices.
In the U.S., the shale revolution of the 21st century further altered the way the WTI contact was viewed.
The U.S. set the stage by importing oil, but as domestic production increased, many barrels were kept at home. Because the U.S. had an oil export ban at the time, a relic from the Arab oil embargo, barrels would pile up.
NAT GAS NOT NO LONGER U.S. CROWN JEWEL
Around the globe, though, supplies tightened as China's oil demand continued to rise. The U.S. WTI market, because of the export ban, was growing more out of touch with the overall global market.
In 2012, that caused the Energy Information Administration (EIA) to strip the title of global benchmark from WTI and award it to Brent.
At the time, the EIA said the "change was made to reflect better the price refineries pay for imported light, sweet crude oil and takes into account the divergence of WTI prices from those of globally traded benchmark crudes such as Brent,” according to reports.
Now that the U.S. oil export ban has been lifted, however, and U.S. shale producers have taken a hit due to the coronavirus, that could change. WTI might rise again.
But the way the global economy has grown, two benchmarks may prove better than one. Brent and WTI both set prices and help the users of that commodity to manage risk better -- buoying the U.S. and the global economies alike.
Phil Flynn is senior energy analyst at The PRICE Futures Group and a Fox Business Network contributor. He is one of the world's leading market analysts, providing individual investors, professional traders, and institutions with up-to-the-minute investment and risk management insight into global petroleum, gasoline, and energy markets. His precise and timely forecasts have come to be in great demand by industry and media worldwide and his impressive career goes back almost three decades, gaining attention with his market calls and energetic personality as writer of The Energy Report. You can contact Phil by phone at (888) 264-5665 or by email at pflynn@pricegroup.com .
