If the oil price continues to recover, there is potential for the share price to push back up to £3.70 per share. For the US exchange listing , analysts quote a median price increase of 13 per cent in the coming year, according to CNN Business.
Trading in the US and Norway-listed oil tanker company Frontline has been choppy in the first half of the year. The share price started the year around NOK113, then fell to NOK57 in line with lower oil prices. It spiked in early and late March when other stocks were falling, and again in April, rising to NOK121 per share.
The price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia, followed by the height of the Covid-19 disruptions, exacerbated oversupply on the oil market and a lack of storage capacity meant tankers were used as floating storage and Frontline’s capacity was in demand at premium prices. The company plans to invest $100 million to expand its tanker storage capacity, indicating it sees opportunities for growth. The sharp fall in the Frontline share price in May could be presenting an opportunity to buy, with the stock trying to form a base about NOK70. The recent low around NOK67 offers a potential stop-loss level for a trade.
On the technical indicators, the relative strength indicator (RSI) has retreated from being oversold and the moving average convergence divergence (MACD) is relatively flat. For the US exchange listing, analysts quote a median price increase of more than 26 per cent in the coming year, according to CNN Business.
A major player in the US oil shale fracking boom, Chesapeake Energy has been hit hard by the steep drop in crude oil prices. In its first-quarter financial results, the company reported a net loss of $8.3bn and it is set to file for bankruptcy protection after failing to make an interest payment on its $9bn in debt.
The share price has been in steady decline, plunging from $172 at the start of the year to just $13, a fall of 93 per cent. But there has been plenty of volatility in the price in the interim, with a short-squeeze on the stock in early June more than quadrupling the value from $13 to $72 before it collapsed back again.
While some stocks of companies teetering on the brink of bankruptcy have attracted interest from investors looking to cash in outsized gains in the event of a recovery, the uncertainty surrounding the future of the Chesapeake Energy suggests holding off to see how the bankruptcy pans out.
US major oil and gas exploration and production company ConocoPhillips cut its oil production by around 400,000 barrels per day in response to the lack of demand in recent months, and reported a first-quarter loss of $1.7 billion compared with earnings of $1.8 billion a year ago. But the company recently said it is considering restarting some of its production in response to the rise in oil prices.
The share price sank to the $20 level in March, having started the year at $65, and rebounded briefly to $50 in early June. Despite a pullback to $42, there is still potential upside on the trend since March and the stock could push back above $50 per share. Recent support indicates a stop-loss for a trade at $36.50 per share.
If you’re looking to invest in oil stocks as a recovery play without risking exposure to another drop in the individual company share prices, consider trading contracts for difference, or CFDs, on the Oil Portfolio Index .
It consists of eight of the leading US oil stocks offered by Capital.com, including Chevron (CVX) , Exxon Mobil (XOM) , ConocoPhillips, Occidental Petroleum (OXY) , Canadian Natural Resource (CNQ) , Apache (APA) , Noble Energy (NBL) and Whiting Petroleum (WLL) . The index is equally weighted and serves as a market sentiment indicator to make it easier for investors to profit from the industry’s volatility.
