SGX Nifty up 55 points; here's what changed for market while you were sleeping
Nifty futures on the Singapore Exchange traded 55 points, or 0.52 per cent higher at 10,603, in signs that Dalal Street was headed for a positive start on Friday.
India 10-year bond yield edged higher 0.05 per cent to 5.84 after trading in 5.82-5.84 range.
Positive jobs data in the US and a rise in Asian markets may help domestic stocks extend gains, but rising virus cases and geopolitical tensions may keep the upside capped.
Here’s breaking down the pre-market actions.
Nifty futures on the Singapore Exchange traded 55 points, or 0.52 per cent higher at 10,603, in signs that Dalal Street was headed for a positive start on Friday.
Nifty50 on Thursday failed to surpass the recent swing high 10,553 on a closing basis, even as the day marked the highest close for the index in 64 sessions. Analysts said the sentiment remains positive, but further buying is needed to instill confidence among traders.
Vedanta Ltd will be dropped from NSE's benchmark index Nifty 50 and other indices from July 31 on account of the company's proposed voluntary delisting. In its place, HDFC Life Insurance Company will be included in the Nifty 50 index, NSE Indices, a subsidiary of the National Stock Exchange (NSE) said in a statement.
Japan's benchmark Nikkei 225 index was up 0.64 per cent, or 142.62 points, at 22,288.58 in early trade. Hong Kong's Hang Seng added 0.78 per cent, or 195.09 points, to 25,319.28. In CHina, Shanghai Composite Index rose 0.43 per cent, or 13.43 points, to 3,104.
US stocks ended higher after data showed the economy added 4.8 million jobs in June. On Thursday, the Dow Jones Industrial Average advanced 92.39 points, or 0.36 per cent, to 25,827.36. The S&P500 index rose 14.15 points, or 0.45 per cent, to 3,130.01. The Nasdaq Composite index was up 53.00 points, or 0.52 per cent, to 10,207.63
Crude prices fell on Friday as the resurgence of the coronavirus globally and in the United States, the world's largest oil consumer, dimmed the prospects of fuel demand recovery. Brent crude futures were down 37 cents, or 0.9 per cent, at $42.77 a barrel, and US WTI crude futures fell 34 cents, or 0.8 per cent, to $40.31 a barrel.
Net-net, foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) were sellers of domestic stocks to the tune of Rs 556.72 crore, data available with NSE suggested. DIIs were net buyers to the tune of Rs 908.64 crore, data suggests.
Rupee: The rupee surged by 56 paise to close at more than three-month high of 75.04 against the US currency, tracking weakness in the greenback and gains in domestic equities amid optimism over potential coronavirus vaccine.
10-year bonds: India 10-year bond yield edged higher 0.05 per cent to 5.84 after trading in 5.82-5.84 range.
Call rates: The overnight call money rate weighted average stood at 3.55 per cent, according to RBI data. It moved in a range of 1.80-4.10 per cent.
US unemployment drops to 11.1%... US unemployment fell to 11.1 per cent in June as the economy added a solid 4.8 million jobs, the government reported Thursday. But the job-market recovery may already be faltering because of a new round of closings and layoffs triggered by a resurgence of the coronavirus, AP reported. The jobless rate stood at 13.3 per cent in May.
Japan's service sector PMI improves in June... Japan's services sector extended activity declines for a fifth straight month in June, although the pace of contraction slowed significantly after a nationwide state of emergency was lifted, easing disruptions to businesses. The final Jibun Bank Japan Services Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) rose to a seasonally adjusted 45 in June from 26.5 in May.
RBI stimulus likely for services sectors… RBI may unveil more relief measures for some of the stressed sectors of the economy, especially in the services segment such as hospitality, tourism and others, as efforts are stepped up to help them emerge from the bruising impact of the lockdown. Government sources said such measures will likely be aimed mostly through the monetary policy side.
Half of India is now 25 or older… For the first time, more than half of India’s population, irrespective of gender or whether it’s in urban or rural areas, is now 25 years or older. This was revealed in the Sample Registration System 2018 report released recently by the registrar general and census commissioner of India. As India’s fertility rate goes down steadily along with a rise in life expectancy, the proportion of its young population is shrinking and the median age has been increasing.
Parekh calls for realty loan rejig… HDFC chairman Deepak Parekh has called for a one-time restructuring of real estate loans to help developers find last-mile funding for their projects. He strongly backed RBI on allowing interest to be charged on loans under moratorium. In a letter to shareholders in the mortgage financier’s annual report for fiscal 2019-20, Parekh called for easier financing, loan restructuring and also end-to-end approval and disbursement of mortgage loans.
Ecommerce policy set to change…Amazon, Flipkart, Facebook, YouTube and other companies that store or mirror Indian users’ data overseas will be subject to periodic audit, according to a draft ecommerce policy that will soon be made public. Ecommerce companies will have to make available any data the government seeks within 72 hours or pay a penalty. That’s a comedown from last year’s draft that sought to impose tight controls on user information being stored overseas.
Top firms suspend guidance for first time… For the first time in over two decades, several top corporates have suspended revenue guidance issued to investors and business partners, saying they cannot reliably estimate the economic implications of the Covid-19 health crisis. Infosys, L&T, HUL, InterGlobe Aviation, Cummins India, Wipro, HCL Technologies, Diageo, Sun Pharma and Ajanta Pharma among several others skipped disclosing growth estimates this year, citing an unpredictable business climate in terms of demand and future outlook.
Chinese smartphone production hit… Smartphone production worth thousands of crores of rupees at units of Chinese companies such as Oppo, Vivo, Realme and Xiaomi has been badly impacted as disruption in component imports from China — due to strict checks at ports — has squeezed supplies. The shortage of labour due to the Covid-19 safety protocols has only made matters worse, reducing production to nearly 30-40% of pre-pandemic days.
One-fifth of India aircraft on Chinese lease… More than one-fifth of leased passenger aircraft in the country belong to leasing firms owned or controlled by Chinese entities or those based in Hong Kong. Thirteen aircraft lessors — eight based in China and Hong Kong, two headquartered in Singapore and Dublin controlled by Chinese banks, and three Dublin-based joint ventures entirely or majority owned by Chinese or Hong Kong entities — have leasing contracts for about 130 aircraft with India’s major airlines.
HUL bid to glow draws Emami ire… HUL has replaced the word ‘Fair’ with 'Glow' on its iconic skin-care brand Fair & Lovely, and renamed the men's variant as Glow & Handsome. Rival Emami said it had already launched a men’s product with a similar brand name and accused HUL of violating its trademark rights.
