Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oil.
Brent Crude prices gained on Thursday’s early trading session, reversing previous losses recorded at Asia’s trading session. This was propelled by a sharp drop in oil stockpiles outweighing concerns that a spike in U.S. coronavirus infections and revived lockdown measures in California could stall recovery in fuel demand.
Brent crude ( LCOc1 ) gained 0.57% to trade at $42.27 a barrel 10.37 am local time, after gaining 1.8% yesterday.
Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oil. The international benchmark is used to set the price of crude oil of about two-thirds of the world’s traded crude oil including that of Nigeria.
READ MORE: Nigeria’s external reserve drop by $261 million in 15 days, oil firms to sell forex to CBN
Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp, Stephen Innes, spoke about the ultimatum the Saudis are giving other producers towards stabilizing crude oil price. He explained that “The price falls were further compounded by warnings from Saudi Energy Minister Prince Abdulaziz who, in no uncertain term, issued a stern ultimatum to OPEC+ laggards to comply with the cartel’s recent production agreement or face a price war. The Kingdom is not going to do the bulk of the heavy lifting while other member states are not 100% compliant.”
Jeffrey Halley of OANDO in a note to Reuters also explained that, “The drop in stockpiles, reports of oil moving out of floating storage, and strong manufacturing PMI data across the globe formed a constructive case for oil prices rising.”
“The overnight price action and EIA data have temporarily lifted the COVID-19 gloom that has capped oil prices all week,” he added.
Your email address will not be published.
Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils.
Brent crude gained about 0.68%, to trade at $43.08 a barrel by 5.01 am local time, after a 4.3% gain recorded in the previous week.
The implied volatility for Brent crude price has plunged to the lowest levels triggered by prices collapsing at the end of Q1 2020 as many oil traders shifted their attention to tightening oil output due to the agreement with the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and its allies.
Quick fact: Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils. The international benchmark is used to set the price of crude oil for about two-thirds of the world’s traded crude oil, including Nigeria’s crude (Bonny Light, Brass River, Qua Iboe, etc.).
Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp, in a note to Nairametrics, explained in detail the positive macros affecting oil prices. He said:
“Positive macro inflection points – most recently, the rebound in US employment – continue to support oil despite the disquieting trajectory in the US coronavirus cases.
“OPEC production, which is at the lowest level since 1991 has also been helping, both with sentiment and the fundamentals for oil.
“And while the rebalancing of supply and demand still seems to be occurring more quickly than expected, risks remain. OPEC’s planned July 15 meeting may address the possibility of once again extending the most extensive phase of the OPEC+ production cut agreement.”
Amid rising numbers of COVID-19 cases in major cities of the world’s largest economy and consumer of crude oil, a Reuters tally showed that in the first four days of July alone, 15 states in America reported upward movement in the number of new COVID-19 infections, with events over the holiday possibly triggering another upsurge.
The worsening wave of cases in major global economies strengthened concerns among cocoa traders.
At the last trading session, September Cocoa futures closed at $2,164.50.
As a result of weakening demand globally for cocoa and its substrates coupled with the present cocoa glut, as supplies outweigh demand, the price of September cocoa futures dropped to $2,159 per 1000kg, nearing a one-year low, before stabilizing above its support levels.
Globally chocolate is often classified as a luxury item, meaning, in times of high economic uncertainty like this, the consumption of such products will falter, as consumers focus more on necessity goods.
The worsening wave of cases in major global economies strengthened concerns among cocoa traders.
However, Nigeria’s leader remains optimistic recently that efforts made by fiscal stakeholders in that sector, seems to be bearing fruit, as Nigeria recorded a surge in revenue in Cocoa, year to year.
President Muhammadu Buhari said Nigeria’s revenue from cocoa and sesame seeds has increased by $79.4 million and $153 million respectively in the past year.
“Our efforts on growing non-oil exports have started to yield some results. For instance, in the past year, our revenue from cocoa and sesame seed increased by $79.4 million and $153 million,” he said.
Nigeria plays a leading role in the cocoa industry, covering a 6.5% share of the global production of cocoa.
Nigeria is also the fourth largest exporter of cocoa beans globally, behind Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, and Indonesia, according to the National Export Promotion Council. Cocoa exports in Nigeria are projected to grow annually by 4% in the coming years.
These export earnings from cocoa, if invested properly, could further help Nigeria reduce its reliance on crude oil, which makes up a large chunk of its export earnings (about 90% Est), and minimize the impact of oil price swings to its economy.
