Bangalore Mirror Bureau / Updated: Jun 22, 2020, 13:26 IST
in the last fortnight have risen across India, with prices varying across states based on different VAT rates, charged by different states. As on June 21, 2020, petrol rose to Rs 79.23 a litre in the national capital, while diesel climbed to Rs 78.27 per litre. In Bengaluru, petrol is priced at Rs 81.81 per litre and diesel at Rs 74.43 per litre. Is the fuel price hike justified and, why have prices domestically risen?
, the benchmark that India primarily uses, has risen by about 162% from a low of $16 per barrel in April 2020,to close at roughly $42,on June 19,2020. Domestic fuel prices, largely market driven, have, therefore, risen in tandem.
price rise has been driven by these factors--output cuts to the tune of 9.4 million barrels per day in May by Saudi Arabia led Opec and its allies like Russia, drilling by US shale oil wells falling to two-year lows of barely 7.63 million barrels per day, fall in US crude oil output by 2 million barrels per day, demand recovery in China, which saw a 4.4% increase in industrial output in May and of course, a rise in consumption demand in USA, which saw retail sales rising by a solid 17.7% in May 2020.
It is important to note that the fuel price hikes locally, since June 7, 2020, commenced only after a prolonged gap of 82 days, despite global crude oil prices surging dramatically in the interim. Net auto fuel marketing margins for
(OMCs) are back in the black, at over Rs 0.90/litre from minus Rs 1.28/litre on June 6, 2020. Hence critics who allege that OMCs have been profiteering recklessly are grossly mistaken. Fuel retailing in the country is dominated by state refiners and OMCs like Indian Oil Corporation, Bharat Petroleum Corporation and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation that own about 90% of all the retail outlets in the country.
These OMCs suffered heavy losses when global crude oil prices crashed in March 2020. Due to the lockdown, in a benign gesture, the rise in excise duties and road cess in March were not passed on to end consumers, but was borne by these aforesaid companies, despite the fact that fuel prices are largely market driven in India. To set the prices of petrol and diesel, Indian oil companies consider trade parity pricing (TPP).Trade Parity Price (TPP), consists of 80% of Import Parity Price (IPP) and 20% of Export Parity Price (EPP).
IPP represents the price that importers would pay in case of actual import of product at the respective Indian ports and includes the elements of Free on Board (FOB) price + Ocean Freight + Insurance + Custom Duties + Port Dues, etc. Similarly, EPP represents the price which oil companies would realise on export of petroleum products. This includes FOB price + Advance License benefit or ALB for duty free import of crude oil pursuant to export of refined products. Consequent to abolition of Customs Duty of Crude oil, the ALB is currently zero. To cut to the chase, while international crude oil prices do play a significant role, local fuel prices are derived from various other elements, which also play a crucial role, as is evident from aforesaid formulas.
For instance, often higher gasoline cracks also result in local fuel prices remaining high despite a sharp fall in crude prices, as was the case in July 2019.The price of Brent crude fell 10.57% last July, while petrol price in Mumbai rose 2.45% in that month. In August 2019 alone, crude prices globally, fell 8.68%, while petrol prices locally declined by only 0.95%,because gasoline and diesel crack prices went up by anywhere between a solid $4.5 and $9 per barrel. “Crack” is an industry term for the cost of separating the various component products of crude oil, including gases such as propane, heating fuel, gasoline, light distillates like
, intermediate distillates like diesel fuel, and heavy distillates like grease.
So gasoline and diesel cracks also play a role. Theoretically, every $1/barrel fall in Brent crude leads to a 0.45/litre reduction in product prices, assuming “other things” are constant. However, other things like the rupee-dollar exchange rate, cess, refining cost, import duties, shipping charges, freight rates and dealer commissions & profit margins are never quite constant in the dynamic real world. This explains why there may be a direct “cause and effect” relationship between the direction of global crude oil and local fuel prices, but certainly not in the same degree and magnitude.
Recently, the Congress demanded that the recent fuel price hikes be rolled back.
is in the Congress DNA. Ironically, Congress-ruled states have been at the forefront of VAT increases, with the Gehlot regime in Rajasthan, for example, raising VAT on petrol from 30% pre-lockdown, to 38% currently and, VAT on diesel from 22%,to 28%.It would be apt to say that, politics aside, now that global crude oil price (Brent),has risen by over 162%, between March 2020 and June 2020,it is only logical to expect measured price hikes, as India imports about 83% of its crude oil needs.
Opec and its allies are cutting back crude output by 9.7 million barrels per day in June and, by a similar amount in July,too. From August, till December 2020, Opec and its allies will again cut crude output every month by 7.7 million barrels per day. That, coupled with a 8.6% rise in Chinese crude oil throughput in May 2020, on the back of rising demand, indicates that unless there is a second wave of
induced lockdown globally and locally, which could destroy global and local demand, oil prices will hold firm and steady, for now.
, is planning to increase natural gas consumption by 2.5 times, as part of the energy mix, to 15% by 2030, from the current level of 6.2%. The ongoing transition from an “oil economy”, to a “gas economy”, under Modi, is undeniably, the best anti-dote to insulate India from the vagaries of volatile global oil prices.
