Tide of unwanted crude to continue rising as coronavirus destroys demand for gasoline, other products
Oil storage is filling up fast.
This updated article was originally published on April 23.
There’s no easy way out of the global oil glut that’s caused a historic, and occasionally bizarre, collapse in crude oil prices this spring, according to a long-time commodity-focused hedge-fund manager who has scored big gains during the market’s slide.
The next four to six weeks are all but certain to see continued increases in crude oil inventories as a result of the demand destruction wrought by the COVID-19 pandemic and a reluctance until recently by major producers to curb output, said Doug King, co-founder and chief investment officer of the London-based Merchant Commodity Fund, in a Wednesday interview. That could translate into ”extreme weakness” over that stretch, he said.
The fund, which has benefited in part from short bets on gasoline, crude and other commodities, is up 34% year-to-date, King said.
“The industry seems to be a little bit reluctant to take the medicine that everyone else is taking — shuttering, furloughing, trying to balance supply and demand,” King said. “Obviously it’s a huge part of the wealth of many, many countries and so I understand it’s extremely painful, but it is no different to what is happening around the world with every other sort of resource or company who’s been told to produce 20% less than they were or 30% less than they were.”
Instead, the world was flooded with additional crude as Saudi Arabia and Russia engaged in a price war that began in early March and that was ended just last week with an agreement by major producers to curb output.
When the lockdowns end, much will depend on how quickly economies can revive and how producers, including those in the U.S. shale patch, continue to respond, King said. That would allow inventories to stop rising and begin to plateau, though if the lockdowns extend into June or beyond, things will get only more difficult.
As economies come back to life, oil refineries won’t be roaring immediately back toward full capacity. But a pickup in gasoline demand, which has been destroyed as motorists stay home and airlines are all but grounded, could finally put a lid on rising crude supplies. Capacity utilization at U.S. refineries was at a 12-year low of 67.6% last week, according to Energy Information Administration figures.
Refiners are running at low capacity because gasoline demand has fallen as much as 50%,  and storing gasoline is more onerous than storing crude or distillates, King said. The Oil Price Information Service estimated that March gasoline demand fell 19.1% versus the same month last year, while demand in the first half of April was down 48.8% versus the same time frame in 2019.
Indeed, gasoline was a big part of King’s strategy this spring. Short bets on gasoline futures RB00,
paid off in a big way in March. King, a veteran commodity trader, said experience trading in the physical energy markets gives the fund an edge.
“You need to understand impact of what demand destruction can do, and what is available storage, and what people will do refining-wise to solve the problems,” he said.
Front-month Nymex gasoline futures RB.1,
plunged 76.5% from a Jan. 6 close of $1.7544 a gallon to 41.18 cents on March 23. Gasoline futures have retraced some of that decline, but fell 7% last week to end Friday at 66.12 cents.
Front-month Nymex WTI futures CL.1,
