The epic crash in U.S. crude oil prices hit an unprecedented milestone Monday as demand dives and storage capacity dwindles amid the coronavirus pandemic.
West Texas Intermediate futures for May delivery, which expire Tuesday, plunged more than 100% to -$37.63 a barrel. That means sellers have to pay someone to take the oil off their hands. Brent crude oil prices, which have already rolled over to June-delivery contracts, fell 8.9% to settle at $25.57 per barrel.
"If you hold the contract you're going to have to take the delivery," said Edward Moya, a market analyst with Oanda. "But no one wants to do that and since that's the case we are seeing such a severe drop deep into negative territory."
He said it's too early to tell what might happen to June futures as they get close to expiry, but he said he would be "surprised if we saw a close repeat of what happened today."
But he expects oil majors to be close to a breaking point with production. Meanwhile, the more actively traded June U.S. crude futures tumbled 18% to $20.43 per barrel, and July U.S. crude futures were down 11% to $26.18 per barrel.
For May WTI, the problem is compounded because the contract is settled by physical delivery at Cushing," said Ann-Louise Hittle, vice president, Macro Oils, at Wood Mackenzie said. "Storage at the Oklahoma facility is expected to be full within weeks. Brent is not constrained by this requirement for physical delivery."
U.S. crude is in the largest contango ever seen, meaning future oil prices in forward months are above current prices. The situation is the opposite of normal backwardation pricing, which decreases in more distant, or forward, months.
OPEC and top non-members, together known as OPEC+, agreed to cut 9.7 million barrels of production a day in May and June, their deepest ever earlier this month. Oil majors and independent U.S. firms have scaled back capital spending and rig counts as demand dries up.
But the supply cuts likely won't match the collapse in demand, leaving the globe awash with oil as countries lock down and restrict travel to prevent the spread of the deadly coronavirus.
"Some of the selling pressure will ease once we will get through the day delivery tomorrow," Phil Flynn, senior market analyst for the Price Group, told IBD. "Then the market can be optimistic that next month is going to be better, see some buying coming back into the market. A month from now we might see OPEC cuts go into full effect. We may see some cities reopening."
Get exclusive IBD analysis and action news daily.
Get exclusive IBD analysis and action news daily.
