For India to maintain its economic momentum, low oil prices are going to be a relief but not necessarily a major supportive factor for economic growth, says Vandana Hari, Founder & CEO, Vanda Insights.
Oil prices had weakened even before coronavirus scare: Peter Cardillo, Spartan Capital
Crude has firmly settled at $58. The timing really could not be better for India although the cause is not really the best. What would it mean for Indian equity markets as well as on the fiscal side of things?
Lower oil prices are always good news for major import dependent countries and especially India. But what one needs to keep in mind is that low oil prices are good when the rest of the economy is doing well because then they work as a support factor for economic growth. But in the current circumstances, the Chinese economy is going to get hit pretty bad at least for this quarter. To some extent, given the interconnectedness of the economies globally, we expect a lot of Asian economies to be affected by that.
A lot of supply chain disruptions are already coming to the fore. In a situation where it is a challenge for India to maintain its economic momentum, low oil prices are going to be a relief but not necessarily a major supportive factor for economic growth.
The OPEC decision on oil prices is looming. Potentially whenever there is a supply constraint, oil prices tend to shoot up. But in this case we are seeing a constant slide. That’s a bit confusing. Also, concerns over the virus are driving gold, a safe haven metal, upwards. Why is there no similar concern about crude?
There is definitely a major concern around crude demand. The biggest challenge for the oil market right now is that it is very hard to put a finger on exactly how much oil demand will be affected. The attention is mostly on China which is the second largest consumer of oil and the biggest contributor of demand growth. Various panellists have come up with estimates on how much of jet fuel, diesel, gasoline demand will be affected, but right now a lot of this is basically shooting in the dark since the virus outbreak has not peaked yet. We do not know where the peak will be. We do know that a lot of international companies are closing operations. They are suspending manufacturing in China. A lot of airlines have slashed flights or suspended flights to China.
So the oil market knows that demand in China is definitely going to be affected. To what extent that is unclear. To some extent, that will also have a ripple effect in neighbouring Asia but again that is very unclear. So that is the biggest challenge and if OPEC does manage to advance its meeting, that will be the biggest challenge for OPEC as well. They could decide to cut more output but how much more is going to be a very hard decision to make.
You are saying that the slide in oil is more demand driven right now. So if the situation improves in China, could you see these oil prices correct upwards again or do you see them forming a new consolidated position around $58-60?
That is the other big question. If you look at what happened during SARS, the maximum impact on Chinese economy and Chinese demand growth was concentrated in a single quarter during SARS. The current coronavirus spread has escalated much faster than SARS. This is probably more a question for health. Is it going to peak and drop faster? Is the whole outbreak going to be compressed into a smaller period? I expect that once we have seen the peak, which means after that, it will continue to decline. there will be a psychological bump up in oil prices. But Brent prices could see a very slow recovery to return to above $65.
