Please join us Wednesday 15 July at 3PM BST / 4PM CEST for 'Bitcoin ETP - The institutional investment case' with Bradley Duke, CEO of ETC Group and co-creator of Xetra-listed BTCetc Bitcoin Exchange Traded Crypto (BTCE GR). REGISTER FOR WEBCAST
WisdomTree has introduced sterling-denominated share classes for three crude oil ETCs listed on the London Stock Exchange.
The new share classes provide sterling-based investors with exposure to crude oil futures.
Previously only tradable on the LSE in USD, the new GBP trading lines provide sterling-based investors with exposure to futures contracts on Brent and West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil benchmarks.
Each product is UCITS-compliant and gains its exposure through a fully collateralized swap.
The WisdomTree Brent Crude Oil (BRNG LN) tracks the Bloomberg Brent Crude Subindex which consists of front-month futures contracts for Brent crude oil.
The WisdomTree Brent Crude Oil Pre-roll (BRNB LN) tracks the Nasdaq Commodity Brent Crude Oil ER Index which, similarly, is composed of front-month futures contracts for Brent crude oil. The difference is that this index rolls its futures contracts into the following month earlier, between the first and fifth business days of each month, while the aforementioned Bloomberg Brent Crude Subindex rolls its contracts between the sixth and tenth business days.
Similarly, the WisdomTree WTI Crude Oil Pre-roll (WTIB LN) tracks the Nasdaq Commodity Crude Oil ER Index which consists of front-month WTI crude oil futures, rolled between the first and fifth business days of each month.
Chris Gannatti, Head of Research, Europe, WisdomTree, commented, “We are committed to providing access to a broad range of oil exposures and increasing the solutions available for sterling-based investors. Interest in oil ETPs has been high in recent months as investors look to take advantage of the rebound in oil prices as demand recovers and supply cuts take place.”
WisdomTree’s range of oil ETCs in Europe currently houses $3.4 billion across 15 products. The majority of those assets, $2.6bn, can be found in the WisdomTree WTI Crude Oil (CRUD LN), Europe’s largest crude oil ETC. CRUD has gathered strong inflows in recent months as bullish investors bet on an oil price recovery .
