Oil is a commodity known for its volatility. Over recent weeks, the price has fluctuated immensely on the back of various events, simultaneously impacting the share prices of the top UK oil shares.
History was made on Monday when the price of US oil plummeted below zero to begin trading in negative territory. That means oil suppliers were effectively paying customers to take delivery!
But what does all this mean for the UK oil companies listed in the FTSE 100?
Plunging oil prices across the board are the result of a number of different factors. Most significantly, the outbreak of Covid-19 has dried up global demand for the commodity.
As lockdown restrictions continue, people are shopping, driving and consuming less of the product, meaning suppliers have nowhere to store excess stock.
Evidently, this is bad news for UK oil shares. That said, I’m confident that once lockdown restrictions ease and the global economy returns to a degree of normality, consumption will return to pre-crisis levels.
If you’re bullish about the prospects of a V-shaped recovery, I’d expect the share prices of UK oil stocks to bounce back swiftly as oil consumption increases and the stock market crash comes to an end.
UK oil shares have been particularly hard hit in the market crash. Many have wiped billions from their valuations, trading at prices that haven’t been seen for years.
Take BP (LSE: BP) for example, whose share price has plummeted by around 37% since mid-February. It’s a similar story for Royal Dutch Shell (LSE: RDSA) , falling around 32%. The lesser-known company Premier Oil has seen its share price drop by an eye-watering 80% and it now trades at price-to-earnings ratio of just 1.55.
As a result of the market crash, there may be value to be had with the UK oil shares, some of which I believe are simply ‘too big to fail’ (especially Shell and BP).
Don’t get me wrong, the next few months will be tough. With abysmally low oil prices and the uncertainty of the macroeconomic climate, businesses will be bleeding cash.
However, the financial positions of Shell and BP remain strong. The former has taken steps to free up over $8bn of free cash flow through reducing operating costs, capital spending and working requirements. The later has followed suit, implementing a cost-saving programme to supplement the $32bn it already has available in cash.
Both are yet to announce a suspension of dividends, but that could come in the near future. Especially if the burden of a sliding oil price becomes too much.
Regardless, it’s clear both companies have a strong cash position. I think it’ll be more than enough to see these two market leaders through the various crises they are facing.
With both embarking on the path to net-zero emissions, I think the future of sustainable energy lies with the two industry giants.
Both companies have expanding businesses in solar, biofuels and renewable products. What’s more, both aim to spend billions in order to strengthen their position in the renewables industry.
For this reason, I don’t think either will be going away any time soon. I expect a bright future for UK oil shares , so I’d invest today.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Matthew Dumigan has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
