This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Are You a Bear or a Bull? Charts Support Both
Like life, the stock market is rarely black or white. Right now, however, the outlook is particularly muddled. In technical analysis, when moving averages cross over each other to the downside we call it black. When they cross to the upside we call it golden. Now, the market is giving off mixed signals, making it no more than a bland beige.
Action over the past few days has been bearish, as the Standard & Poor’s 500 dipped to a three-week low. And several major indexes, such as the New York Stock Exchange composite, have moved below rising trendlines from earlier this year to suggest actual technical breakdowns.
But are they? While the NYSE composite breaks its short-term rising trendline, it remains well above the larger declining line from last summer (see Chart 1). And just Tuesday, its 50-day average crossed above its 200-day average for the famous golden cross signal .
I won’t argue that the cross is a buy signal, because often it is just the opposite. But it does speak to the persistence of the rally just as waning momentum speaks to the need for a correction.
Market breadth is also a bit of a puzzle. The NYSE advance-decline line, which keeps a running tab of stocks going up minus stocks going down each day, continues to sport a rising trend from February and is just a few days removed from an all-time high. That’s bullish in that, despite the performance of the indexes, more stocks continue to eke out gains rather than losses.
But at the same time, last week’s upside breakout in the small-capitalization iShares Russell 2000 exchange-traded fund (ticker: IWM ) in both absolute and relative terms is in jeopardy (see Chart 2).
Key sectors are mixed, too, with financials outperforming the market since February but home building, retail and especially big technology now lagging . The fall from grace exhibited by the Technology Select Sector SPDR ETF ( XLK ) has been nothing short of spectacular.
In other popular measures, the Consumer Discretionary Select Sector SPDR ETF ( XLY ), which theoretically tracks stocks that do better when the economy is doing well and consumers are feeling good, broke out last week relative to the market (see Chart 3). That is quite a feat considering Wednesday’s ADP report , which showed private-sector job growth was the weakest since April 2013.
And as if that were not confusing enough, the interest-rate-sensitive Utilities Select Sector SPDR ETF ( XLU ) is in the midst of a breakout attempt from its four-week pullback (see Chart 4).
This is important because utilities are still a safe haven for investors who feel the need to hedge their bets. It also suggests that Treasury bonds — the ultimate risk-off asset — will remain firm as interest rates stay low. That would be bearish for stocks.
Perhaps beige is the wrong color for this market; maybe a muddy brown would be better. This much is clear: Black and gold are definitely not the right choices.
There is a good argument that stocks are ripe for a correction after a sharp rally, but with the undercurrents in sectors, interest rates and breadth there is not enough evidence to hand the reins over the bears. Bulls, however, do not have much room for error. The falling U.S. dollar may be the handwriting on the wall, and the Fed better be very careful with its decision at next month’s meeting.
Getting Technical Mailbag: Send your questions on technical analysis to us at online.editors@barrons.com . We’ll cover as many as we can, but please remember that we cannot give investment advice.
Michael Kahn, a longtime columnist for Barrons.com, comments on technical analysis at www.twitter.com/mnkahn . A former Chief Technical Analyst for BridgeNews and former director for the Market Technicians Association, Kahn has written three books about technical analysis.
