As Nasdaq Soared Past 10,000, Apple and Microsoft Celebrated Their Own Unique Feat
Scott McNealy, the founder and CEO of SunMicrosystems who said investors made ridiculous assumptions about his company’s value in 2000.
Amid the market’s mania this past week, the Nasdaq Composite hit 10,000 for the first time ever. The big round number felt like a fitting milestone for tech’s crucial role in keeping markets afloat over the last few months.
Inside the celebration came an equally remarkable feat: Apple (ticker: AAPL) and Microsoft (MSFT) both closed the trading session on Wednesday with a market value of $1.5 trillion, the first time any American stock had reached that level, and the twin titans of American technology crossed the line together.
Microsoft and Apple were born one year apart in 1975 and 1976, respectively. Over their long histories in the public markets—Apple went public in 1980 and Microsoft in 1986—they’ve carved out different markets. Apple serves consumers. The company has gone from desktops to mobile phones, but the target market hasn’t changed. Microsoft targets the enterprise. And while its business has largely shifted from boxed software to the cloud, its customers also remain the same.
Both companies are defined by their founders—Bill Gates and Steve Jobs are arguably the two most important men in the history of computing—but, amazingly, most of the companies’ value has been created under successor CEOs.
In Apple’s case, 86% of the company’s current market value has been generated since Cook took the reins in 2011. At Microsoft, 80% of the value creation has come under Satya Nadella, who took over for Gates’ successor Steve Ballmer as Microsoft CEO in 2014. Finding a great leader is a company’s most important task. Apple and Microsoft prove the point.
I’ve written in this column before that all of the tech titans— Amazon.com (AMZN), Alphabet (GOOGL), and Facebook (FB) in addition to Apple and Microsoft—would come through the Covid-19 crisis stronger than ever, and the past few months have strengthened my view. All five stocks are higher on the year, with an average gain of 17%, crushing the 6% decline by the S&P 500 (Amazon is the best performer, up 38%, with Alphabet the laggard, up 5%).
But tech valuations are in frothy territory. Microsoft now trades at 10 times sales for the current fiscal year. That figure reminded me of a legendary rant by Sun Microsystems CEO Scott McNealy in 2002.
He chided investors for the ridiculous assumptions they had made in bidding Sun stock up to a multiple of 10 times sales at the height of the internet bubble. I reached out to McNealy last week hoping to get a passionate call for investor restraint. But McNealy wouldn’t take the bait.
In fact, McNealy highlighted the difference between Sun and the current generation of software-driven tech giants.
“The market tends to price more aggressively on electron- and cloud-based scenarios than on hardware,” he told me. “The real issue is that gross margins are often so much higher on these stocks. I used to think that Microsoft Office had the world’s best business model with a cost of goods sold of zero ...But now Google sells every word in the dictionary to the highest bidder every day, which turns out to be an even better business model.”
As it happens, all five tech titans fell on Thursday as the Nasdaq Composite slid more than 5%, and both Apple and Microsoft are back below the $1.5 trillion market cap level.
The selloff was a reminder of the potential excesses in the market, including the surge in initial public offerings (see page 13). But there’s nothing excessive about Apple and Microsoft—and I suspect both will revisit the $1.5 trillion mark before long.
Last week brought a clear example of how a new focus on tech regulation has begun to affect stocks in a real way. Grubhub (GRUB) agreed to be acquired by Amsterdam-based Just Eat Takeaway.com (TKAYY). The pairing does nothing to address the biggest issue facing the U.S. food delivery market—too many players cutting into industry profits.
Just Eat wasn’t Grubhub’s preferred merger partner. For more than a month, Grubhub had been negotiating with Uber Eats. An Uber-Grub combo would have reduced the market to three primary players, with Uber-Grub holding half of the U.S. market, leaping past DoorDash and putting Postmates in a distant third. So what happened?
Potential pushback from regulators seemed to make an Uber-Grubhub tie-up too risky. Four Democratic U.S. Senators had already asked the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission to look into potential harm to both restaurants and diners. In effect, the Uber-Grub deal was killed by a whiff of regulatory risk. So instead of reducing the number of players, Grubhub gets a capital infusion that allows them to compete more aggressively. Just Eat Takeaway shares fell more than 16% in the two days after the deal was announced. And Uber Technologies (UBER) finished the week down 13%. Grubhub was flat.
Meanwhile, on Friday Barron’s confirmed a Wall Street Journal report that DoorDash is close to securing a new round of financing from T. Rowe Price and Fidelity—and potentially the SoftBank Vision Fund, an existing investor. The new round would boost DoorDash’s valuation to more than $15 billion and moves the company closer to an IPO. A richer and more competitive DoorDash is good news for diners looking for cheap delivery, and bad news for anyone owning stock in a food-delivery firm.
As Nasdaq Soared Past 10,000, Apple and Microsoft Celebrated Their Own Unique Feat
Amid the market’s mania this past week, the Nasdaq Composite hit 10,000 for the first time ever.
