gave up less than a point to end the session virtually unchanged at 8,494.75.
For the week so far, the Dow is off 3%, the S&P 500 is down 2.7% and the Nasdaq is down 1.8%.
Equity markets buckled midday Thursday on conflicting reports that suggested that remdesivir, the hoped-for treatment for the illness derived from the novel strain of coronavirus, may not be successful in early trials, according to the Financial Times (paywall).
However, the maker of the therapeutic Gilead Sciences GILD,
says that results from a trial that was mistakenly published on the World Health Organization’s website, and subsequently removed, isn’t conclusive and referred to articles about findings as “inappropriate characterizations.” Still shares of Gilead closed 4.3% lower.
The market reaction highlights the desire for a salve for the COVID-19 disease that has infected more than 2.6 million people world-wide and brought economies in much of the developed world to a screeching halt in a matter of months.
Indeed, domestically, another 4.4 million Americans filed for first-time jobless claims in the most recent week, slightly worse than the 4 million consensus forecast among MarketWatch-surveyed economists.
But a rise in stocks Thursday morning suggested that Wall Street may be getting inured to awful weekly data from the U.S. labor market after a month of reports indicating that millions are out of work due to COVID-19 shutdown procedures.
“Markets love information, and we’re getting more information. As ugly as it is, we have a better view into this than we did 30 days ago,” said Donald Calcagni, chief investment officer with Mercer Advisors. “Information transforms uncertainty into risk.”
There are still big unknowns — and hurdles — ahead, Calcagni said in an interview. “This White House has been a train wreck and it’s going to spook businesses and consumers if we re-open the economy too soon.”
A reading of U.S. service sector activity from Markit fell to its lowest on record in April , while its manufacturing purchasing manager’s index was at an 11-year low. Sales of newly constructed homes were at a 627,000 annual rate in March, almost precisely matching the MarketWatch consensus, and a hefty step down from February’s pace.
Meanwhile, investors have been digesting unsurprisingly bad corporate quarterly earnings results. On a year-over-year basis, the earnings-per-share growth estimate is negative-13.6%, and that rate would be negative-11.8%, if the oil sector were excluded, according to data from Refinitiv as of midday Wednesday.
Of the 84 S&P 500 companies that have reported so far, 66.7% have posted results above consensus estimates, while 28.6% have missed the mark. By comparison, over the past four quarters, 74% of companies beat estimates and 19% missed, according to the analytics company.
Some recovery in crude oil prices also supported the benchmark U.S. stock indexes Thursday, lifting the S&P 500 energy sector XLE,
