This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Finally, the Dow Jones Industrial Average vaulted above the milestone 20,000 level. Break out the rally caps and pop the champagne corks, if you must. I find this breakout to be rather meaningless in the big picture, aside from its “psychological” importance – a term I really hate.
What is far more interesting and, in my view, important is the breakout in the NYSE Composite Index. The Dow made its truly significant breakout move in November after the election. It has been at or near all-time highs ever since (see Chart 1).
But despite the NYSE’s short-term breakout after Nov. 8, it was still well below its all-time highs set in 2015. Wednesday’s rally finally pushed it into all-time-high ground (see Chart 2).
Why is that a big deal? The NYSE represents the average stock. While the index uses a modified market-value weighting method, it was still one of the last major market indexes – along with the Dow Jones Transportation Average – to take out its previous major peak.
We can argue over the exact moment the NYSE broke out, whether it was a move above the 2015 intraday or closing high or any number of recent peaks set since this past December, but that would be splitting hairs. For me, the Jan. 5 intraday high of 11,264.17 is good enough. It’s got a nice ring to it for marketing purposes, doesn’t it?
Well, no. It’s not a round number, but it is a technically important one. It will also serve as the top of the newly minted support zone that will determine if the current breakout is for real. As long as the index does not drop significantly below that level, we can feel confident that the postelection bull run is alive and well.
In the grand scheme of things, Dow 20,000 should not be the headline. However, since everyone is much more tuned into this index than the NYSE, let’s turn our attention there. I’ll even concede that since I wrote about this level in December , it has taken on a true technical significance, albeit still of a short-term nature, that it didn’t have before.
Since early December, the Dow stalled in a tight trading range below 20,000. So did the Standard & Poor’s 500 index and even the small and midsize stock indexes, though the Nasdaq Composite did edge higher over that span.
