Bad news in the U.S. about the coronavirus has investors feeling more skittish Wednesday morning.
Dow Jones Industrial Average and S&P 500 futures are down about 1%. Nasdaq Composite futures are down less because tech stocks, seemingly, don’t go down.
The U.S. recorded about 33,000 new coronavirus cases yesterday, according to the Covid Tracking project. The peak daily new case number, from mid-April, was about 36,000. Over the past week, new cases have average about 29,000, up about 30% compared with a week ago.
A morning briefing on what you need to know in the day ahead, including exclusive commentary from Barron's and MarketWatch writers.
The U.S. is testing more—about 520,000 people a day—and that’s partially responsible for the rise in new cases. The positive test rate, however, is also up in recent days. About 5.5% of tests are coming back positive over the past week, an increase of about 1 percentage point from the prior week.
All this means investors need to tread lightly. The stay at home trade—think food, bleach and Walmart —might gain new lift, while the reopening trade—airlines, cruises and casinos—might take a hit.
Sometimes it’s better to be safe than sorry.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said Tuesday that he expects Congress to pass a new stimulus bill in July, telling Bloomberg that it would be “much more targeted to the businesses that are most impacted.”
The initial $2.2 trillion stimulus bill passed in March gave $1,200 to every American earning $75,000 or less, enhanced unemployment insurance by an additional $600 a week, and gave small businesses loans they didn’t need to pay back so long as they kept workers on the payroll.
Mnuchin didn’t put a dollar figure on the next stimulus, nor did he indicate if individuals would receive direct payments again, but Trump has privately said the package could be worth up to $1 trillion .
Other measures being considered include a payroll tax cut, a lowering of capital-gains taxes, and a “back-to-work bonus” to incentivize workers to actively seek re-employment.
The International Monetary Fund publishes an updated outlook for the global economy at 9 a.m. ET today. Earlier in June, the IMF predicted the world’s economy will shrink around 5.2% in 2020.
Whatever we do it’ll be much more targeted, much more focused on jobs, bringing back jobs and making sure we take care of our kids.” – Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin
What’s Next: Direct payments could be the most debated aspect of the next stimulus as some think they disincentivize people returning to work. But with more than 20 million people receiving unemployment benefits, the extra $600 a week payments set to expire in July, and mortgage delinquencies at their highest level since 2011, a new stimulus package is sure to help the recovery.
Covid-19 Testing Will Increase in the U.S.
As cases continue to rise in the U.S., Dr. Anthony Fauci and other top health officials told the House Energy and Commerce Committee Tuesday that the U.S. will increase Covid-19 testing.
President Donald Trump said during his Saturday rally in Tulsa, Okla, that he instructed people to “slow the testing down, please.” Aides have walked back the comment as a joke, but the president doubled down on the remark Tuesday, saying that he doesn’t kid.
“We are proceeding in just the opposite. We want to do more testing, of higher quality,” Assistant Health Secretary Adm. Brett Giroir said at the congressional hearing.
California, Arizona, and Texas reported their highest single-day cases Tuesday. “The safest place for you is at your home,” Texas Gov. Greg Abbott said in a KBTX interview .
“The next couple of weeks are going to be critical in our ability to address those surges that we’re seeing in Florida, in Texas, in Arizona and in other states - they’re not the only ones that are having a difficulty. Bottom line, Mr. Chairman, it’s a mixed bag. Some good, and some now we have a problem with.” -Dr. Anthony Fauci
What’s Next: Fauci said the pandemic won’t end until we have a vaccine, adding that more cases in the fall and winter will be expected. He also said he is “cautiously optimistic” about the availability of coronavirus vaccines by early 2021.
What selloff? Tech giants are leading the Nasdaq Composite back from its lows in March to record highs.
Amazon.com , Facebook , Apple , and Microsoft all hit new highs on Tuesday. Google’s parent Alphabet is well on its way to its highs from February.
The Nasdaq has soared 31.6% since the end of March. If such gains hold, it would be the Nasdaq’s best quarter since the fourth quarter of 1999.
What’s Next: The tech sector is starting to look a lot like 1999. Tech makes up 27% of the S&P 500, compared to financial stocks at 10%. The difference between the two is the largest it’s been since the dot-com bubble.
The Barron’s Investing in Tech event series continues today. Jonathan Neman, the co-founder and CEO of Sweetgreen, will discuss how tech helped to build a nationwide salad chain, Margaret Keane, the CEO of Synchrony , will look at the future of payments, and Barron’s top markets and tech editors will examine what the rally in tech stocks and hot IPO market say about investors’ appetite for risk. Register to join the virtual event, which starts at 1 p.m. ET.
The French pharmaceuticals group said Tuesday during a virtual R&D event that it could secure approval for the coronavirus vaccine it is developing in the first half of 2021, about six months sooner than it had previously indicated.
Sanofi is working on the vaccine along with its U.K. competitor GlaxoSmithKline , which is providing its adjuvant technology to the project. Other companies trying to come up with a vaccine include the U.S.’s Moderna and the U.K.’s AstraZeneca , in cooperation with Oxford University.
The French group said that a Phase 1/2 clinical trial will begin in September instead of December as originally scheduled, with the goal of having the vaccine approved by June 2021.
Sanofi is also developing another vaccine with Translate Bio , a U.S. company, based on mRNA technology. Translate shares jumped 50% Tuesday on the news that the French partner would commit $1.9 billion to their joint project.
What’s next: Sanofi CEO Paul Hudson understandably expressed confidence that the chances of its vaccine with GSK were “higher than anybody else’s.” But the key issue for all pharma groups in the next few months, if and when vaccines are approved, will be the capacity to ramp up quickly manufacturing and distribution.
Technology companies pushed back against President Donald Trump’s order to temporarily suspend visas, including those for highly skilled workers. The move disproportionately impacts technology companies.
According to a MarketWatch report citing the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, tech accounted for 66% of all H-1B visa holders in the U.S. in 2019.
The White House said it suspended certain work-based visas until Dec. 31 to protect American workers amid a recent rise in unemployment.
Alphabet CEO Sundar Pichai, Apple CEO Tim Cook, and Microsoft President Brad Smith were among the corporate executives that voiced frustrations with the decision on Twitter . (That platform’s CEO, Jack Dorsey, retweeted a company statement in support of immigrant workers.)
What’s Next: Companies employing the most H-1B workers include consulting firms like Cognizant , Tata Consultancy Services , Infosys , Deloitte Consulting, Capgemini , and Accenture , as well as tech giants like Amazon , Microsoft, Alphabet, Facebook, and Apple.
I am an avid reader of your column and have realized a pattern in myself that I am less than proud of. I am in my early 30s, and my partner is in her late 20s. We do well for ourselves, we travel, we aren’t struggling. I own a nice home in a town a few hours away that I rent out because I recently moved to the city.
We are renting in the city now to save money. We have a roommate, and I feel that some friends judge us for this. Our friends are successful and all around our age. They are building extravagant homes, making what I believe to be more money than us, and I can help but be green with envy and always comparing what they have to what we don’t.
I hate that my friends still get help from their parents and were born into money. They have no student-loan debt, one friend is a lawyer and her parents paid for that degree. One couple got their land they’re building their home on paid off by their family. I have had to work hard for everything I have in life, as well as my partner, and it’s just hard seeing them get ahead while we feel like we’re stagnant. I want to be happy for them and stop comparing. How can I do this?
—Newsletter edited by Stacy Ozol, Mary Romano, Matt Bemer, Benjamin Levisohn
Bad news in the U.
