FTSE 100 futures are trading lower after market close as second wave fears mount, suggesting that the blue-chip index will extend losses when the market reopens on Thursday.
Aaran Fronda | Financial writer, London | Publication date : 2020-06-24T21:22:15+0100
FTSE 100 futures are trading 3% lower after market close as second wave fears mount, suggesting that the blue-chip index will extend losses when the market reopens on Thursday.
Over the last three trading sessions this week the FTSE 100 has lost 2.5% of its value, with blue-chip stocks having a terrible time of it on Wednesday, closing 3.11% lower to 6123 points.
IG offers extended hours trading options for the FTSE 100 index and other major indices. Buy long or sell short on the FTSE 100 via CFDs and other instruments provided by IG's market-leading trading solution. Start today by opening an IG account .
Global equities continue to face an uneasy recovery, with stocks taking a tumble on Wednesday amid mounting fears of a second wave of coronavirus cases as governments ease lockdown restrictions.
In the US the S&P 500, Nasdaq Composite and Dow Jones indexes all closed more than 2% lower on Wednesday. Meanwhile in Europe the Euro Stoxx 50, German DAX and French CAC 40 all closed in the red.
‘Coming off the back of a huge market recovery in the months following the March low, we are finally seeing markets wake up to the obvious risks of getting too carried away at the first sign of a recovery,’ said Joshua Mahony, senior market analyst at IG.
‘We are used to the Federal Reserve or Trump administration stepping in at every turn, but that reliance is certainly not A healthy reason to buy stocks.’
The FTSE 100 has succeeded in eking out some higher highs, but it is the steady progression of higher lows that should provide some comfort for the bulls, according to Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG.
‘After rallying towards 6350 the price has come off, but the uptrend is still in place, and a higher low above 6200 should provide another possible entry point for longs,’ Beauchamp added.
‘A reversal below 6150 would likely spell the end of the current bounce and given the shallowness of the gains over the past week, this index could easily move into a more bearish phase.’
Looking to trade the FTSE 100 and other major indices? Open a live or demo account with IG and buy (long) or sell (short) shares using derivatives like CFDs and spread bets in a few easy steps:
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Deal on the world’s major stock indices today.
Don’t miss your chance. Try a risk-free trade in your demo account, and find out whether your hunch could have paid off.
