When deciding which Vanguard index fund you’d like to buy, first consider the type of index you’d prefer your choice of fund to track. Then check out the fees and costs associated with different funds that track the same index. For more insight, check out our guide to asset allocations and model portfolios .
When it comes to index mutual funds, it’s important to pick the right index for your needs. There are literally hundreds to choose from. You can pick an index based on industry, company size, location or asset type.
If you’re overwhelmed by the options, consider choosing a target-date fund, balanced-fund or a broad-market index that tracks the performance of a large segment of the stock market to get started.
Index mutual funds tend to have lower costs than other investment options, making them the right choice for long-term investing. However, there are still costs you should consider, including expense ratios and fees.
The expense ratio is how much of the fund’s assets go toward administrative and operational expenses, cutting into your returns. According to Vanguard, the average expense ratio across its index mutual funds is 73% less than industry average.
Vanguard may charge purchase and redemption fees to buy or sell shares of its funds. Many of the company’s funds are free of such fees, but a select few charge 0.25% to 1.00% for purchases and redemptions.
Vanguard has over 60 index mutual funds to choose from. Which fund is best for your portfolio is dependent upon your investment strategy, comfort level with risk and your financial goals.
Let’s look at five leading Vanguard index mutual funds, all of which offer very low expense ratios and have delivered good 10-year average annual returns. All five funds can be purchased via Vanguard Admiral Shares, requiring a minimum investment of $3,000.
The Vanguard 500 Index Fund fund invests in 500 of the largest public companies in the United States, including Microsoft, Apple, Amazon and Facebook. It tracks the performance of the S&P 500 and invests in different industries like communication services, energy, and health care.
The Vanguard Intermediate-Term Corporate Bond Index Fund invests in bonds issued by industrial, utility and financial companies with maturities between five and 10 years. It tracks the performance of the Barclays Capital U.S. 5-10 Year Corporate Bond Index.
The Vanguard Growth Index Fund invests in large U.S. companies in industries that tend to grow at a faster rate than the rest of the market, such as consumer goods and services. The fund aims to match the performance of the MSCI US Prime Market Growth Index.
The Vanguard Large-Cap Index Fund gives you exposure to U.S. stocks in the top 85% of market capitalization, investing in large companies in the financial, health care, industrial, and oil and gas industries. Major companies in this fund include Johnson & Johnson, Berkshire Hathaway, Visa and Procter & Gamble. It tracks the performance of the CRSP U.S. Large Cap Index.
The Vanguard Developed Markets Index Fund invests in a range of large, mid and small companies in markets outside of the United States, particularly in the health care and technology sectors. Major businesses within the fund include Toyota, Astrazeneca and Samsung Electronics. The fund tracks the performance of the FTSE Developed All Cap ex US Index.
Once you’ve decided which index mutual funds are best for you, you can open up an account in under 10 minutes.
Decide which kind of account you will use. If you’d like to use Vanguard index funds to save for retirement, you can open a traditional IRA , Roth IRA or self-employed IRA. If you’d like to invest your money for other goals, you can also open a taxable brokerage account.
Link your banking information. Next, link your bank information, including your checking account number and routing number. Before you can make any transactions, Vanguard will ask you to verify your account information by confirming a small deposit to the linked account. This process can take a few days to complete.
Buy shares. Once your bank account has been verified, your account is ready and you can begin buying and trading shares. Just click on the link that says “Buy and Sell,” and enter the fund name to buy the index mutual fund you want.
