Another 3.17 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits, more than analysts expected from Thursday’s report. However, it seems that investors are mostly shrugging off this weekly gloom.
It’s safe to say the major indices are — stocks are well in the green Thursday morning. The S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite all opened up for the day. Plus, with this morning’s open, the Nasdaq Composite has erased its 2020 loss.
There’s a particular type of optimistic investor that loves Chinese electric vehicle maker Nio (NYSE: NIO ). The company represents massive potential — but it hasn’t had an easy journey. It has faced cash crunches, high levels of criticism and a lot of market doubt. Shares rest now just above $3.60.
But part of its struggle has been universal. In the first quarter, car sales were deeply impacted as the novel coronavirus kept people inside. That’s why the company’s April results had Nio stock gain 10.4% in the stock market today.
As InvestorPlace’s Bret Kenwell wrote in his daily column, the company delivered 3,155 vehicles in April . That’s up more than 100% from March. And, it’s also a great testament to China’s economic recovery.
According to TipRanks, Nio stock has been racking up hold and sell ratings. But today’s report could be just what the company needs to gain new investor favor. Bank of America analyst Ming-Hsun Lee gave it a “buy” rating today and a $5 price target . That alone gave investors hope.
So, is it a buy now? InvestorPlace Markets Analyst Luke Lango thinks so. He wrote Monday that Nio has the potential for “HUGE” gains. That’s because he sees the electric vehicle market, especially in China, set for a massive boom.
Earlier this morning, bulls seemed set to have a good day. More and more states are jumping on board the reopening bandwagon, and nations around the world are doing the same. But with the exception of the Nasdaq Composite, stocks shed their gains over the course of the day.
Investors have a lot to consider, including the health risks associated with reopening. Retailers are struggling with bankruptcy and further stimulus funding seems far away. Perhaps it’s not all that surprising the S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average couldn’t stay in the green.
When InvestorPlace’s Larry Ramer recommended three top solar stocks in February 2020, he likely had no idea the novel coronavirus was about to sweep the world. It’s also likely that he didn’t predict the ensuing pandemic would throw Russia into an oil price war with Saudi Arabia. But boy, this year has been a doozy.
In March and April, renewable energy seemed doomed. With crude oil at rock-bottom prices, there just was less appeal for alternate sources. As Bloomberg’s Anthony Di Paola writes, cheap crude used to deter investments in renewable energy , particularly in nations dependent on oil sales.
But May 2020 is showing that things are changing. Di Paola writes that countries in the Middle East are surprisingly moving forward with renewable energy projects. Saudi Arabia is pushing to drastically up its renewable capacity by 2030, and in April took the next steps in selecting solar projects.
In the United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi and Dubai are moving forward with building solar plants after receiving “record-low” bids. So, it seems like solar power is still hot.
For investors who want to get ahead of the rebound, here are Ramer’s three picks:
On another positive note, shares of all three companies are climbing in the stock market today.
Did Disney Stock Just Start Its Comeback Story?
In many ways, Disney’s (NYSE: DIS ) earnings report was a disaster for the company. It reported a 58% drop in operating income for its parks and cruises segment — one of its most iconic. Overall, Disney’s earnings per share came in at 60 cents, missing expectations for 89 cents. And it’s suspending its dividend for the first half of the year .
That’s all bad news. But there’s a silver lining boosting DIS stock in the market today.
CNBC’s Jessica Bursztynsky writes that its Disney+ streaming service now has 54.1 million subscribers . That’s up from 33.5 million at the end of March.
Yes, the streaming service certainly isn’t driving the bulk of Disney’s revenue. And yes, critics are right in saying Disney is fundamentally associated with Cinderella’s castle, not a living room couch. But the quick success of Disney+ highlights the power of the company, and what InvestorPlace’s Chris Markoch sees as the crux of its comeback story.
Even as a serious bull, Markoch isn’t denying that Disney faces some serious challenges. However, he’s confident that at least a handful of curious consumers will return to Florida and California parks as soon as they reopen. That’s why he says with some faith, trust, pixie dust and hand sanitizer, DIS stock is a buy right now .
Here’s a final note: Disneyland’s Shanghai location will begin reopening May 11. Investors should keep a close eye on that process.
If you’ve checked the financial news in the last few days, you’ve likely seen some doom-and-gloom headlines about Warren Buffett’s annual Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE: BRK.A , NYSE: BRK.B ) meeting. Some investors are focusing on a “tone shift.” Buffett is known for being incredibly pro-America and incredibly optimistic. But this time around he isn’t buying stocks.
InvestorPlace’s Dana Blankenhorn wrote today that Buffett’s cash hoarding is representative of deeper economic troubles in America . The Federal Reserve has stepped in to save demand, but Americans aren’t spending money. Frankly, Blankenhorn writes, many don’t have money to spend.
Buffett also sold airline stocks — some of his more noteworthy investments. He also is hinting at another market correction, with what InvestorPlace’s Will Ashworth describes as a less-confident approach than during the Great Recession.
If the Oracle of Omaha isn’t buying, isn’t that a terrible sign? While there are certainly problems in today’s market, including the income inequality Blankenhorn highlights, Buffett’s virtual meeting wasn’t a destruction of the bull case.
In fact, Ashworth writes that many of Berkshire Hathaway’s businesses are doing well . Some are even increasing headcounts in the midst of a pandemic, which is a comforting sign of their health.
From a sentiment perspective, Buffett isn’t suddenly betting against America. He’s merely cautioning investors that it’s impossible to predict tomorrow, or even next month, as the novel coronavirus continues to affect the world.
Beyond that, Buffett needs what you could call an elephant-sized deal to profit. He has $125 billion to work with — throwing money into the market better be worth his time.
So what’s the takeaway? The 89-year-old Buffett is being cautious, and he’s looking for better values to step in and buy. That doesn’t mean it’s time to cash out, because you certainly won’t end up with his $125 billion cash pile. You’re better sticking it out in the market.
Yesterday, we reported that Capital One (NYSE: COF ) will keep the majority of its employees working from home until September. To many experts, that’s far from an irrational move.
Even Berkshire Hathaway’s (NYSE: BRK.A , NYSE: BRK.B ) Warren Buffett is speaking up about remote work. According to InvestorPlace’s Ian Cooper, the Oracle of Omaha sees the pandemic making permanent changes to office life.
In other words, many Americans who began working from home because of the novel coronavirus will not return to traditional offices just because lockdown protocols are lifting.
Tech stocks that play into telework — and specifically teleconferencing — have been some of this year’s biggest winners. But should you throw your money behind any old videoconferencing name?
Bitcoin is hovering around $9,200 at the moment. It’s up over 11% in the past week and over 30% in the past month.
There’s a buzz in the air, and many in the industry are pointing to bitcoin’s halving as one reason generating the recent excitement and price action.
Indeed, searches for “bitcoin halving” on Google have increased exponentially in recent weeks.
More and more people are clamoring to figure out what’s behind this change to bitcoin’s mining reward and why it could lead to higher prices.
If you’re not familiar with the halving (or halvening), basically, it happens about every four years when the supply of new bitcoin coming on the market gets cut in half. The idea is if the supply drops at a time when demand is likely to increase, prices can skyrocket. Well, that day is coming quick!
Investors who know their stuff about bitcoin, like InvestorPlace analyst Matt McCall, have been talking about it for months. Matt recently held a special event that gives folks what they need to know right now to take advantage of this historic opportunity.
The most important thing to remember at this point is that while the halving is just days away, it’s not too late.
According to CoinDesk , recent research by asset manager Bitwise shows that a portfolio balanced with bitcoin can add value, even when prices are historically high.
The research shows a traditional portfolio of 60% stocks and 40% bonds that made room for 2.5% in bitcoin in January 2014 would have increased returns from 26% to nearly 45% by March 31, 2020.
Returns still increased even when bitcoin was added at its to-date all-time high of $20,000 in December 2017, and then saw a substantial pullback.
The bottom line is that while bitcoin is volatile, it’s also not tightly correlated to other assets. That gives bitcoin a leg up for investors seeking to more profitably balance risk and reward in their portfolios.
See, while bitcoin’s rise has been impressive, many of the other crypto assets known as altcoins have been doing much better. Altcoins are really where the action’s at these days.
Matt lays out what’s going on with altcoins as the halving approaches, and why their rise should quickly surpass bitcoin’s. Check it out .
In a new note to clients, UBS warned that “sitting in cash is not the answer.” What prompted such an announcement? Well, in the last eight weeks, investors have been piling into money market funds , a specific type of mutual fund that primarily holds cash and other highly liquid assets.
Plus, in the same time period, the amount of cash on the sidelines has leapt $1 trillion to a total of $4.7 trillion. During the entire 2008 financial crisis, that figure increased by less than $500 billion.
It’s clear that the stock market just seems too volatile some days. But one of the biggest takeaways from the Great Recession is that investors who got out of the market and stayed out are some of this decade’s biggest financial losers. That’s why it’s important to park your cash somewhere it will make you money.
So where should you park it? UBS recommends using the novel coronavirus as an opportunity to selectively buy cyclical stocks, defensive stocks and other long-term winners . According to the analysts, this strategy helps minimize risk and volatility while still putting your money to work.
The firm also recommends stocks that are set to benefit from Covid-19 , like plays in telemedicine and health tech, fintech, e-commerce, automation and the so-called food revolution.
The world changed in March 2020, and so did the stock market. Names that were solid in January looked laughable. Stocks that no one was thinking about like Clorox (NYSE: CLX ) and Allied Healthcare Products (NASDAQ: AHPI) suddenly were flying high.
Behind this shake up was the global supply chain. Clorox products were hot because of their disinfectant power, but also because Clorox wipes were impossible to find. Allied Healthcare Products gained popularity as consumers — and healthcare professionals — struggled to find personal protective equipment (PPE).
Now, it seems that those areas of the supply chain are starting to settle into a new normal. But GOBankingRates’ Gabrielle Olya writes that it’s time to prepare for the next phase of panic buying. With that will come new hot stocks. Here are the categories she thinks will be in high demand soon :
Laptop exports have decreased, and more Americans are working from home. InvestorPlace’s Tom Taulli writes that Microsoft (NASDAQ: MSFT ) is a great stock to buy thanks to its Surface laptops .
Generic drug exports are also at risk thanks to stay-at-home orders in India. InvestorPlace’s Josh Enomoto wrote that Teva Pharmaceuticals (NYSE: TEVA ) is a top healthcare play now as consumers begin stocking up on generic and over-the-counter drugs .
Apple (NASDAQ: AAPL ) already warned shareholders that its iPhone supply chain may face disruptions. InvestorPlace analyst Louis Navellier sees innovation pushing AAPL shares higher for years to come.
Are you picking up a bad habit in quarantine? Unfortunately, a vape shortage is just around the corner, writes Olya. That’s because China is a lead manufacturer of vaping products. Want to profit from this trend? Look to Turning Point Brands (NYSE: TPB ), another pick from Josh Enomoto .
The next thing flying off the shelves is likely to be cans of diet soda. Coca-Cola (NYSE: KO ) in particular makes its low-calorie options in China. But InvestorPlace’s Dana Blankenhorn is confident that KO shares — and the company’s dividend — will survive the pandemic.
When everything in the market seems upside down, it’s nice to know what the experts are doing. It’s also nice to get a sense for what the experts are thinking.
According to John Rogers, the co-CEO and chief investment officer at Ariel Investments, there’s no doubt that the pandemic-driven downturn is “stunning” and “wrenching.” But he’s not panicking. That should help calm individual investors’ nerves.
Like other famous value investors, Rogers is looking for discounts in hard-hit, iconic brands . On his buy list are Madison Square Garden Entertainment (NYSE: MSGE ), Vail Resorts (NYSE: MTN ) and Royal Caribbean (NYSE: RCL ).
It’s good to know Rogers is looking for stocks to buy now. But, he does have a word of caution. He says as concerns about a second wave of the novel coronavirus swirl, the return to normal may be slower than expected.
Investors are really clamoring for states to reopen — and they’re driving the market higher on Wednesday morning. By the end of this week, several states will have started to lift lockdown measures.
As the market prices in higher levels of consumer spending and reopened businesses, will Wednesday see major gains? I guess we’ll have to wait and see.
With that in mind, the S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite are all opening in the green.
As more and more people are stuck home, their thoughts turn toward learning something new. And InvestorPlace Markets Analyst Luke Lango sees that as just one of many reasons Chegg (NYSE: CHGG ) could be going to $200.
“It increasingly appears that Chegg is taking over the education world ,” wrote Lango. “… over the past few years, Chegg has created a strong but niche on-demand connected learning platform which some, but not many, high school and college students use.”
And the proof is in the pudding — or in this case, the earnings report. Not only was its revenue up 35% for the first quarter, but its subscriber numbers were up by about the same. And with social distancing and closed schools still the order of the day for much of the U.S. (historically Chegg’s biggest market), more people may find their way to one of the company’s programs in Q2.
Now, that tailwind won’t last forever. Eventually we’ll get back to some semblance of normal, and many students will go back to learning in a physical school. But Lango sees the company enjoying a higher profile going forward that will lead to more growth. “Thanks to Covid-19, students and academic institutions across the world are pivoting towards online learning platforms. Those platforms have a lot to offer. Consequently, even once physical school resumes, many of those students and institutions will continue to use online learning tools as necessary supplements.”
Chegg would have to do a lot right to get to that $200 target, but it’s already well on its way.
Is the White House phasing out its highly watched virus task force? Will meat shortages destroy the U.S. food supply chain? And what did Tesla (NASDAQ: TSLA ) CEO Elon Musk really name his son ?
Boy, those are some big questions. In all seriousness, the S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite all closed the day in the green. But they shed gains in the last hour of trading, perhaps as headlines became too overwhelming.
There’s a lot to watch in the market these days, particularly as states continue the push to reopen. Don’t blink, you could miss a massive move.
With all the uncertainty in the market — and in the broader world — now may seem like the perfect time to sit back, bite your nails and count your cash. But InvestorPlace’s David Moadel has a different idea.
On Tuesday, he shared an argument for taking some big risks in the face of the pandemic. Why? Big risks often mean big potential rewards.
Don’t worry. He’s not recommending stocks from unproven companies. Instead, he’s looking at stocks that have long histories and represent hard-hit industries . Here’s Moadel’s list:
We’ve written that hygiene habits are likely to change for good, and trends like telework and telemedicine will stick around — and accelerate. But Wells Fargo analysts are also honing in on another trend gaining permanence thanks to the novel coronavirus.
Before the pandemic, consumers were prone to eating out. Now, forced to eat at home more often, certain food stocks are seeing sales spike. Wells Fargo doesn’t think that trend will immediately reverse.
