Dr. Anthony Fauci, the United States’ top infectious disease expert, will testify today as states continue reopening. He warns that a premature move could cause “needless suffering and death.”
But Fauci is at odds with President Donald Trump and the broader market sentiment. As states reopen, businesses reopen. Furloughed employees return to work. It sounds so simple, right?
On Tuesday morning, it appears so. The S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite are all opening in the green.
Over the last few weeks, this blog has provided investors several reasons to be bullish on Carnival (NYSE: CCL ) stock. We’ve looked at insider buying and the company’s plan to return to cruising this summer. Now, InvestorPlace’s Bret Kenwell has an even better reason to buy shares .
It turns out that consumers really are ready to start cruising again. In the three-day period after Carnival announced its summer plans, bookings rose 600% compared to the previous three-day period . How’s that for pent-up demand?
Granted, Carnival isn’t reopening all ports at once. It currently is eyeing summer departures from Florida and Texas, but that’s better than nothing.
As Kenwell writes, cruises won’t look the same. Carnival and its peers need approval from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. If they acquire that, they’ll also be looking at some new health guidelines. He says travelers should anticipate health screenings, no self-serve buffets and restricted occupancy in some areas. Passengers may have to provide medical notes proving they’re not at increased risk of contracting the novel coronavirus.
Still need some convincing? InvestorPlace’s Ian Cooper wrote that now is the perfect time to buy CCL shares . He’s confident that 2021 will see renewed momentum. Plus, he likes votes of confidence from Wall Street. UBS analyst Robin Farley says Carnival is the strongest in its sector.
Boris Johnson is pushing for businesses to reopen in the United Kingdom. The United States continues to see a wave of phased reopenings. But South Korea just saw a spike in new novel coronavirus cases, as did China’s Wuhan, the origin of the outbreak .
Many in the U.S. are still waiting for their $1,200 stimulus checks. Democrats and Republicans are bickering over a fourth wave of stimulus payments — and representatives of the former party are hoping to aid hard-hit states .
Elsewhere in the pandemic-driven investing world, attention is on companies like Quidel (NASDAQ: QDEL ), set to ramp production of new test kits. Tesla (NASDAQ: TSLA ) CEO Elon Musk is threatening to move the company unless his California plant is allowed to reopen.
With all this in mind, the S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite are in rocky territory at the start of the week.
Is It Time to Start Buying Car Stocks?
New reporting from The New York Times shows the light at the end of the tunnel may be getting closer. According to a Monday report from AutoNation (NYSE: AN ), car sales began to rebound in April. CEO Mike Jackson said that the “automotive recovery is underway” as consumers remain eager to purchase new vehicles amid easing lockdowns.
No, that’s not exactly what many experts predicted. It seemed likely that car sales would keep falling. Unemployment figures are still on the rise, and consumer spending is hurting as a result. But there are other things working in favor of car sales.
For one, public transit is likely to lose even some loyal riders as employees return to their daily commutes. In early April, Axios’ Kim Hart wrote that public transit was on a “death spiral” as consumers worried about heightened infection risk. After 9/11 rocked New York City, it took six years for subway ridership to return to pre-crisis levels.
Jackson agrees that this growing fear of public transit is partially responsible for the rebound in car sales. At the end of April, sales were off by only 20%. At the start of that same month, they were off by 50%.
Shares of AN stock are up almost 4% in intraday trading, in what has otherwise been a rough day for stocks. On a similar note, Ford (NYSE: F ), General Motors (NYSE: GM ), Toyota (NYSE: TM ) and Fiat Chrysler (NYSE: FCAU ) are planning for near-term returns to production. California-based Tesla (NASDAQ: TSLA ) is finding some high-ranking support in its push to reopen early .
Bullish investors should keep a close on eye on AutoNation and this group of automakers. As states reopen, we should get more data on public transit use. If consumers delay their return to subways and bus systems, car sales could spike.
Bullish on Cryptocurrencies? Here’s a New Way to Invest.
Today is a big day in the cryptocurrency world. After lots of waiting, it’s finally the day of bitcoin’s (CCC:BTC) halvening, or halving. This event has had InvestorPlace analyst Matt McCall pounding the table for weeks. Why? If demand for bitcoin is high at the time of the halving, prices could soar.
But there’s another reason for crypto bulls to celebrate today. According to an early morning press release, investors can now trade physically delivered futures contracts for ether (CCC:ETH). This news makes Chicago’s ErisX the first U.S.-based exchange to allow such trades.
So what does this all mean? Ether refers to the tokens behind ethereum, a specific use of blockchain technology. Ether tokens enable operations on the ethereum blockchain platform.
Bitcoin is certainly the most well-known crypto, but many factors, including the novel coronavirus, have sparked a growing interest in other cryptocurrencies. That’s why ErisX has been pushing for a license to offer more regulated investment products. Previously, the exchange operated a live spot market for ether and other digital currencies.
Now, individual and institutional investors can participate via physically delivered futures contracts . When these contracts expire, investors will actually receive ether tokens, and can use these contracts to build a position in the currency. ErisX has a similar offering for bitcoin futures.
The biggest takeaway is that now investors have direct access to ether through traditional commodities markets. Another popular investment option has been the Grayscale Ethereum Trust (OTCMKTS: ETHE ) which tracks the price movement of ether , but does not lead to ownership of tokens.
When Warren Buffett of Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE: BRK.A , NYSE: BRK.B ) announced he was selling his stake in several major airlines , investors panicked. The Oracle of Omaha is a legend. He can practically see the future, and he sees value even in hard-hit sectors.
What does it mean when he doesn’t see rebound value in the airlines? According to InvestorPlace’s David Moadel, it’s not exactly the red flag many investors fear.
In fact, Moadel thinks that individual investors shouldn’t follow in Buffett’s footsteps. He thinks three of the major airlines are actually ready to fly high once the novel coronavirus eases.
Today California-based Quidel (NASDAQ: QDEL ) is looking to go from zero to hero. Yep, you guessed it. The daily victory comes on news related to the novel coronavirus.
Over the weekend, the company received emergency-use approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for a new type of test. This antigen test detects proteins associated with the virus , requires just a nasal swab and generates results within minutes.
Shares of QDEL stock are up 30% in intraday trading as a result.
There’s a lot to like here. One positive is the quick turnaround. Other tests have longer wait times, although offerings from Abbott Laboratories (NYSE: ABT ) feature 5-minute and 15-minute results. The faster people get their results, the sooner they can self-isolate or get the treatment they need.
Quidel’s test is also the first antigen test to receive such approval. Other tests look for either antibodies or genetic material associated with the virus. Although antibody testing has become a hot topic, critics point to its flaws. Many of the marketed tests generate a significant amount of false-positive results .
According to NPR’s Jason Slotkin these antigen tests will also be cheaper and more accessible . One flaw is that they are not as sensitive (meaning they can trigger false-negative results ) as the harder-to-come-by PCR tests that look for the virus’ genetic material.
Shoving aside scientific details, investors are happy. Quidel’s high-flying shares are likely to stay hot as states ramp up testing in efforts to safely reopen.
Warren Buffett made waves at his annual meeting for Berkshire Hathaway (NYSE: BRK.A , NYSE: BRK.B ). As we reported last week in this blog, some investors took his commentary to be a sign of distress. Remember, it’s not that easy for someone with more than $100 billion in cash to find meaningful value in the stock market.
However, individual investors can now find value in Berkshire Hathaway stock. According to Barron’s Andrew Bary, UBS analyst Brian Meredith has a “buy” rating on BRK.B stock . His 12-month price target of $233 is equivalent to $349,500 on BRK.A shares. That’s over $100,000 of upside.
So, why buy now? Berkshire’s book value is falling, representing a chance to purchase shares at a discount. It now trades at about 1.1 times book — down from a recent average of 1.4 times.
Yes, it’s important to note that Buffett doesn’t like focusing on the company’s book value. He’s long said that it doesn’t accurately reflect the underlying values of his businesses — he thinks Berkshire’s intrinsic value is much higher. Despite Buffett’s preferences, the book value is hard to ignore now.
InvestorPlace’s Wayne Duggan agrees, citing Whitney Tilson in his argument. Tilson sees Berkshire Hathaway as the “best retirement stock in the market.” With a lower-than-average price-book ratio and Tilson’s glowing endorsement , Berkshire shares look too good to pass up.
Bill Ackman, the famed investor behind Pershing Square, is turning up the heat on Restaurant Brands International (NYSE: QSR ). His firm has held a 5% stake since 2012, but a recent move has Pershing Square upping its stake to 7% — and filing U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission form 13D signaling activist intent.
According to CNBC’s Kenneth Squire, Restaurant Brands International is a typical investment for Ackman. It offers predictable growth and solid cash flows. Plus, since its Burger King, Tim Hortons and Popeyes brands operate with franchise models, it has very low capital expenditures.
This means that while other restaurants face a long road to recovery, QSR stock should bounce back with greater ease. As InvestorPlace’s Dana Blankenhorn wrote in early April, its franchisees are dealing with the brunt of the novel coronavirus . Yes, shareholders face a year-to-date loss of 20%. But Blankenhorn believes this is an opportunity to pick up more shares.
TipRank’s Maya Sasson agrees. She wrote in late April that with extremely well-known brands, QSR stock is ready for double-digit growth by the end of 2020 .
Wait, what? Last week, it seemed like all Wall Street wanted was for more states and businesses to reopen. Now, though, headlines proclaim that investor “jitters” are behind Monday morning’s gloomy stock market open.
Public health officials continue to warn of the risks associated with premature reopening, and South Korea just reported a spike in novel coronavirus cases . As is the new normal, there’s just too much going on to put everything nicely in balance.
As states continue to push forward with phase-one reopenings, there will be a lot to watch. For now, the S&P 500, Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Nasdaq Composite are all in the red.
In Bret Kenwell’s stock market wrap-up today , he put the spotlight on Disney (NYSE: DIS ). The headlines have been pretty rough for DIS stock lately, but things seem to be taking a turn for the better.
Investors and fans alike had been worried that even once things began to reopen, theme parks and major sporting events – places known for massive crowds — might not pick up where they left off. Would the visitors be too worried about Covid-19 to want to brave the crowds, even with precautions?
But then Shanghai Disney started selling tickets to their reopening on May 11, and those tickets sold out “in minutes.” Sure it’s opening at 30% capacity, but still – it sold out in minutes. Apparently, there is plenty of demand, and that bodes well for when the rest of Disney’s theme parks reopen.
Not only that, but while the big-name locations are closed until further notice, on May 20 some of the stores are opening in Disney Springs , a shopping area at Walt Disney World.
Rosenblatt sees these moves as positives, as earlier openings mean more revenue. Analyst Bernie McTernan wrote “If the timeline for reopening Downtown Disney in Shanghai and the Shanghai Disneyland is similar for Disney Springs and Disney World it suggests Disney World would reopen July 22nd , 41 days ahead of our current forecast.”
Investing in a newspaper, in this economy? That seems a bit outrageous. But according to new reporting from The Wall Street Journal, New York Times (NYSE: NYT ) didn’t have that bad of a first quarter.
In fact, the company reported its biggest quarterly increase in digital subscriptions ever , which also helped to push up revenue. The New York Times gained 587,000 new digital subscribers , likely as consumers race to find accurate information about the novel coronavirus.
What is gloomy is the company’s outlook for the current quarter — with predictions for advertising revenue to fall as much as 55%. This problem by no means is unique to The New York Times. Ad-dependent companies all through the investing ecosystem are hurting.
So what does this mean? Well, the paper is attracting new subscribers when it matters most, even though consumer spending is dropping. Plus, it’s likely many investors will price in falling ad revenue in advance. When ad spending rebounds, NYT stock should benefit along with its peers.
But there’s an even more bullish case to be made here. After the report, CFRA analyst Tuna Amobi upgraded shares to a “buy” rating with a $38 price target. It’s not drastic, but it is a good sign.
InvestorPlace’s Josh Enomoto has been bullish on NYT stock since January 2020 — and his catalyst goes beyond the pandemic. As many investing experts predict that President Donald Trump will retake the White House in November , Enomoto thinks The New York Times will see heightened readership as the election approaches . It’s no secret that Trump and the press don’t always get along, which should mean more drama, more subscribers and more share price returns for investors.
Until Wednesday, the only good news in the automotive world seemed to be the birth of Tesla (NASDAQ: TSLA ) CEO Elon Musk’s son. That all changed when General Motors (NYSE: GM ) reported first-quarter results that had the analyst community cheering.
Granted, it’s a rough world for traditional carmakers. As we’ve previously reported in this blog, General Motors and its competitors — Ford (NYSE: F ) and Toyota (NYSE: TM ) — have seen sales slump in a big way as the novel coronavirus impacts consumer spending.
Regardless, Wednesday’s earnings report had GM stock up 3%. That’s because adjusted earnings per share of 62 cents seriously beat expectations for 33 cents. General Motors also beat on revenue expectations.
This surprise had Deutsche Bank analyst Emmanuel Rosner “re-upgrade” GM stock to a “buy” rating , just a month after downgrading it to a “hold.” Although shares are still down almost 40% for the year, Rosner thinks they’ve priced in any more bad news. He also interprets the first-quarter results as a sign that cost-cutting measures are working in General Motor’s favor.
From Deutsche Bank’s Emmanuel Rosner:
“GM’s strong [first-quarter] performance and forward-looking outlook … demonstrate the benefit from its proactive actions to transform the business, right size its costs and boost profitability.”
Here’s one more fun note. According to TipRanks, 80% of analysts covering GM stock think it’s a buy now . The average 12-month price target is $31.11, implying almost 40% of upside.
Not too long ago, Bank of America analyst Michael Widmer set an 18-month price target of $3,000 on gold . With that hike he had one catchy message: “The Fed can’t print gold.”
Widmer’s words likely resonate with a lot of investors. As we’ve previously reported in this blog, the Federal Reserve’s unprecedented actions to fight the economic effects of the novel coronavirus have some worried about inflation after the pandemic.
And on Thursday, famed investor Paul Tudor Jones made headlines when he admitted to purchasing bitcoin as a hedge against inflation. Clearly, inflation risk is top of mind.
But gold is the original hedge. One chief executive in the space is calling it a “self-funded insurance policy” as demand for the shiny metal climbs. That’s why InvestorPlace’s Chris Markoch rounded up four gold stocks for investors to consider now. Just as with other hot trends, Markoch cautions against buying into the hype. His recommendations are not speculative — they’re quality plays.
