This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Is the Stock Market Open Today? Here Are the Hours for Memorial Day 2020.
Wearing face masks to reduce the risk of spreading the novel coronavirus, soldiers place U.S. flags in front of every grave site ahead of the Memorial Day weekend in Arlington National Cemetery. (Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images)
After a brutal few months of the stock market’s wild swings, Memorial Day 2020 is finally here. Despite clawing back from their mid-March lows, the S&P 500 index and the Dow Jones Industrial Average are down 8.5% and 14.3% so far this year, respectively. The Nasdaq Composite index has managed a year-to-date gain of 3.9%, with help from pandemic-resistant tech stocks .
Memorial Day, when Americans honor those who died serving in the U.S. military, will be a little different this year. Since Memorial Day is a federal holiday, government offices, post offices, and some banks are closed today. But because of the pandemic, parades around the country have been canceled or limited, while annual picnics, beach trips, and other Memorial Day weekend events will be subject to physical distancing precautions.
Still, those in the U.S. who opted not to “ sell in May and go away ,” as the saying goes, will get a much-needed break to barbecue with friends and family or shop for sales at stores that are open today like Target and Walmart . That also includes the latest crop of sports gamblers-turned day traders , who will have to settle for darts, Russian table tennis, and Armenia Premier League soccer on Monday—some of the only sports events happening this weekend.
Is the Stock Market Open on Memorial Day 2020?
The New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq are closed today in observance of Memorial Day. The CME Globex futures and options exchanges, including equity futures and commodities, will also be closed for trading.
The Securities Industry and Markets Association also recommends that markets for government bonds and other fixed-income securities close for the day.
Are International Stock Markets Closed on Memorial Day?
A morning briefing on what you need to know in the day ahead, including exclusive commentary from Barron's and MarketWatch writers.
The London Stock Exchange is closed for the U.K.’s spring bank holiday on Monday, while markets in most of Europe will remain open. Markets in Canada and Mexico, as well as China, Singapore, Japan and Hong Kong will also be open.
Is the Stock Market Open Today? Here Are the Hours for Memorial Day 2020.
After a brutal few months of the stock market’s wild swings, Memorial Day 2020 is finally here.
