Merger Agreements, Regulatory Disclosures, and Technical Updates - Research Reports on Anadarko, US Steel, Encana, National Oilwell and Diamondback
Editor Note: For more information about this release, please scroll to bottom.
Today, Analysts Review released its research reports regarding Anadarko Petroleum Corporation (NYSE: APC ), United States Steel Corp. (NYSE: X ), Encana Corporation (NYSE: ECA ), National Oilwell Varco, Inc. (NYSE: NOV ) and Diamondback Energy, Inc. (NASDAQ: FANG ). Private wealth members receive these notes ahead of publication. To reserve complementary membership, limited openings are available at: http://www.analystsreview.com/6929-100free .
On September 29, 2014, the stock of Anadarko Petroleum Corporation (Anadarko) gained 0.28% to end the day's trading at $104.25. Shares in Anadarko opened the session at $102.24 and fluctuated in the range of $102.03-$104.52 with a trading volume of 2.84 million shares. The stock has a 52-week range of $73.6-$113.51. Year-to-date, the stock has increased 31.43%, outperforming the NYSE Composite Index which gained 3.35% during the same period. The full research reports on Anadarko are available to download free of charge at:
As per a SEC filing made by United States Steel Corp. (US Steel) on September 4, 2014, the Company's Executive Vice President and CFO, David B Burritt, sold 7,646 shares of US Steel on September 3, 2014 at a price of $39.27. According to the filing, post the transaction, David B Burritt is the beneficial direct owner of 108,834 shares of US Steel. The full research reports on US Steel are available to download free of charge at:
On September 29, 2014, Encana Corporation (Encana) and Athlon Energy Inc. (Athlon) jointly announced that the two companies have entered into a definitive merger agreement wherein Encana will acquire all of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock of Texas-based Athlon via an all-cash tender offer (the "Offer") for $5.93 billion, along with Encana assuming Athlon's $1.15 billion of senior notes, for a total transaction value of approximately $7.1 billion. Encana expects that the transaction will add current production of about 30,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day (boe/d) based on Athlon's current estimated production including recent acquisitions. Doug Suttles, Encana President & CEO commented, "This transformative acquisition further accelerates our strategy and provides us with a prime position in what is widely acknowledged as one of North America's top oil plays. The Athlon team has built an exceptional asset with massive running room that includes greater than 10 years of drilling inventory with up to 11 potential productive horizons of high-margin liquids." The full research reports on Encana are available to download free of charge at:
On September 29, 2014, the stock of National Oilwell Varco, Inc. (National Oilwell) fell 0.51% to end the trading session at $78.10. During the session, shares in National Oilwell opened at $77.74 and fluctuated in the range of $77.05 - $78.26, with a total of 2.64 million shares changing hands. Also, the stock closed below its 50-day moving average of $82.21. Over the last one month, the Company's stock declined 9.64%, compared to the NYSE Composite which fell 2.69% during the same period. Moreover, at the end of trading session, 2-week RSI stood at 35.05 suggesting that the stock is near its oversold territory. The full research reports on National Oilwell are available to download free of charge at:
On September 29, 2014, Diamondback Energy, Inc.'s (Diamondback) stock increased 4.66% to end the trading session at $76.76. During the session, the stock opened at $74.97, and fluctuated in the range of $74.26 - $76.95, with a total of 2.38 million shares changing hands, which is more than double of its 30-day average volume of 1.14 million shares. The stock closed above its 200-day moving average of $70.29. Over the past six months, the Company's stock increased 10.13%, compared to the NYSE Composite which gained 3.01% during the same period. The full research reports on Diamondback are available to download free of charge at:
We do things differently. Our goal is to provide the best content to our exclusive membership. We are constantly hiring researchers, writers, editors and analysts to add to our team and become better than yesterday. If being a part of a fast growing community with an edge in today's market sounds interesting to you, then sign-up today and experience the full benefits of membership.
1. This is not company news. We are an independent source and our views do not reflect the companies mentioned.
2. Information in this release is produced on a best efforts basis by Rohit Tuli, a CFA charterholder. The content is then further fact checked and reviewed by an outsourced research provider. However, we are only human and are prone to make mistakes. If you notice any errors or omissions, please notify us below.
3. This information is submitted as a net-positive to companies mentioned, to increase awareness for mentioned companies to our subscriber base and the investing public.
4. If you wish to have your company covered in more detail by our team, or wish to learn more about our services, please contact us at pubco [at] http://www.analystsreview.com .
5. For any urgent concerns or inquiries, please contact us at compliance [at] http://www.analystsreview.com .
6. Are you a public company? Would you like to see similar coverage on your company? Send us a full investors' package to research [at] http://www.analystsreview.com for consideration.
Content is researched, written and reviewed on a best-effort basis. This document, article or report is prepared and authored by Analysts Review, represented by Rohit Tuli, CFA. An outsourced research services provider has only reviewed the information provided by Analysts Review in this article or report according to the procedures outlined by Analysts Review. Analysts Review is not entitled to veto or interfere in the application of such procedures by the outsourced provider to the articles, documents or reports, as the case may be.
Analysts Review makes no warranty, expressed or implied, as to the accuracy or completeness or fitness for a purpose (investment or otherwise), of the information provided in this document. This information is not to be construed as personal financial advice. Readers are encouraged to consult their personal financial advisor before making any decisions to buy, sell or hold any securities mentioned herein.
Analysts Review is not responsible for any error which may be occasioned at the time of printing of this document or any error, mistake or shortcoming. No liability is accepted by Analysts Review whatsoever for any direct, indirect or consequential loss arising from the use of this document. Analysts Review expressly disclaims any fiduciary responsibility or liability for any consequences, financial or otherwise arising from any reliance placed on the information in this document. Analysts Review does not (1) guarantee the accuracy, timeliness, completeness or correct sequencing of the information, or (2) warrant any results from use of the information. The included information is subject to change without notice.
CFA® and Chartered Financial Analyst® are registered trademarks owned by CFA Institute.
