In this article, I will look at what is going on with the Nasdaq Index and also review the prediction I made in my last update.
Nasdaq surged at the last hour of its previous session as we can visibly see on this chart and was the only Index closed above its opening price point.
So what's going on with Index? Today we saw the Index open just above 8638.70 and advanced to 8762.50 which  I mention in my last update, that these are essential price points to look out for in today's session.
The Index is currently trying to hold at the current resistance level and will only progress further if it holds above 8762.50. This estimate is calculated according to the recent price action. As I said in my last update, we don't know what the market is going to do next, but we can look at historical data and more importantly its current price action to try and determine its next move.
The current trading condition is not suitable for the faint-hearted. The market could move aggressively to the upside, and retreat as we have seen many times in the past. If you decide to get in, make sure you have a trading plan to avoid getting traped.
The next level to look out for is around 8878.00, 8961.70, and 9070.00.
Note: All information on this page is subject to change. The use of this website constitutes acceptance of our user agreement. Please read our privacy policy and legal disclaimer.  
Opinions expressed at FXstreet.com are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily represent the opinion of FXstreet.com or its management.  
Risk Disclosure: Trading foreign exchange on margin carries a high level of risk, and may not be suitable for all investors. The high degree of leverage can work against you as well as for you. Before deciding to invest in foreign exchange you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of experience, and risk appetite. The possibility exists that you could sustain a loss of some or all of your initial investment and therefore you should not invest money that you cannot afford to lose. You should be aware of all the risks associated with foreign exchange trading, and seek advice from an independent financial advisor if you have any doubts.
