NYSE to Launch NYSE Bitcoin Index, NYXBT
NEW YORK--( BUSINESS WIRE )--The New York Stock Exchange, part of the Intercontinental Exchange 
      (NYSE:ICE) global network of exchanges and clearing houses, today 
      and disseminated bitcoin index. Launching today, the NYXBT Index will 
      evaluated and meet NYSE’s quality standards.
      want to follow as they consider transacting, trading or investing with 
      this emerging asset class,” said NYSE Group President Thomas Farley. “As 
      a global index leader and administrator of ICE LIBOR, ICE Futures U.S. 
      Dollar Index and many other notable benchmarks, we are pleased to bring 
      transparency to this market. By combining our technology infrastructure 
      with our expertise in index calculation and data management, we will 
      bitcoin in U.S. Dollars as of 16:00 London time. The index will be 
      from Coinbase Exchange, the leading U.S.-based bitcoin exchange. In 
      minority investment in Coinbase, a leading bitcoin wallet and 
      trading platform with over 2.8 million consumer wallets, 39,000 
      merchants and 7,000 developers.
      of the evolving bitcoin market. The committee will also identify and 
      exchanges that meet NYSE’s rigorous standards for transparency, 
      liquidity and governance are identified. The NYSE Bitcoin suite of 
      indices is anticipated to grow, with new indices introduced over time.
      systemically important benchmarks including ICE LIBOR, LBMA Gold Price 
      the NYSE Arca Biotechnology Index, StrataQuant® Index Family and NYSE 
      tracking them via exchange-traded products.
      regulated exchanges and clearing houses. ICE’s futures exchanges and 
      clearing houses serve global commodity and financial markets, providing 
      risk management and capital efficiency. The New York Stock Exchange is 
      the world leader in capital raising and equities trading.
      property rights of Intercontinental Exchange, Inc. and/or its affiliates 
With a collective portfolio of over 250 benchmark indices, NYSE is a 
      leading provider of indices. NYSE develops proprietary indices to 
      of key segments of the world economy. NYSE indices are available to be 
      licensed as the basis for tradable products, including Exchange-Traded 
      Funds (ETFs), to be launched in the future. For more information on NYSE 
      index services please visit: www.nyse.com/indices
      Intellidex® and StrataQuant® are registered trademarks of NYSE Group, 
      contained in the forward-looking statements, see ICE's Securities and 
      Exchange Commission (SEC) filings, including, but not limited to, the 
      December 31, 2014, as filed with the SEC on February 5, 2015.
