QUESTION FROM READER: I’ve  been noticing some anomalous behavior in the NYSE Advance-Decline data  and other indicators based on NYSE data that does not match up with  other measures of breadth.  I’ve read comments from other authors on  numerous occasions that refer to the same problem and it seems to stem  from the fact that a high percentage of the issues on NYSE are fixed  income and closed end funds, not real equity issues.  Of late this has  been, I believe, seriously skewing the data since stocks have been  rising and fixed income is getting killed.
This  is creating an apparent false (or at least exaggerated) divergence  between price and AD line and other breadth measures as well (HL) and  probably creating false Hindenburg Omens. This is, I believe, a serious  problem for technical analysts who rely upon breadth data.  I have  pretty much decided to stop using NYSE AD and NH-NL data and will  instead switch to using Nasdaq. I think you could do the entire TA world  a huge service and generate a lot of interest in your service by  creating an NYSE ex-closed end and fixed income fund AD line and New  Highs-New Lows.  It’s really NEEDED!
ANSWER: We  have it! Way back in 2003 the New York Stock Exchange reconstituted the  NYSE Composite Index to include ONLY common stocks, weighted by market  float. (To clarify, issues that are not common stocks still trade on the  NYSE, but they are not included in the computation of the NYSE  Composite Index.} This resulted in a much more interesting index, one  that competes well with other favorites in terms of volatility and  correlation to broad market movement.
Some  time after this Decision Point began collecting NYSE common stock only  (CSO) breadth and volume data, and we have a set of NYSE CSO indicators  that are available to subscribers through our Straight Shots Menu, as  well as various indicator series.
Below  we have two Advance-Decline charts — one Common Stocks Only and one  with all NYSE traded issues. Currently the NYSE Composite is composed of  about 1800 common stocks, whereas there are about 3500 issues of all  kinds traded on the NYSE.
Obviously, the All Issues indicators have no useful relationship to the NYSE, but we still carry them for comparison.
The  important thing to note is that the CSO Advance-Decline Line for  breadth is confirming the price highs of the current bull market, and it  is unlikely that the broad market will run into serious problems under  those conditions.
Other  CSO indicators available on Decision Point are the Swenlin Trading  Oscillator (STO), Stocks Above Their 200-EMA, Bullish Percent Index  (BPI), ITBM/ITVM, New Highs and New Lows, McClellan Oscillator,  McClellan Volume Oscillator, 1% EMA of A-D, and Volume Ratios.
Post Footer automatically generated by Add Post Footer Plugin for wordpress.
Read the original article on Pragmatic Capitalism . Copyright 2011.
* Copyright © 2020 Insider Inc. All rights reserved.
