Around eight stocks rose for every five decliners at the New York Stock Exchange, FactSet data shows. The market's strong breadth came as two of the three major U.S. stock indexes —the S&P 500 and Nasdaq — reached all-time highs while the Dow was on pace to snap a three-session slide. —Imbert
Around midday ET, the major stock averages were broadly higher as technology stocks such as Apple and Nvidia outperformed. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq are up 0.6% and 0.9%, respectively, and both hit record highs. The Dow , meanwhile, is up 142 points, or 0.5%. —Imbert
Shares of Tesla rose more than 8% on Wednesday to $930, surpassing Piper Sandler's $928 per share price target, which is the highest price forcast of any Wall Street firm. Piper Sandler told clients it is confident in Tesla's push into new areas of clean energy. Tesla's stock is getting close to its all-time high, touched on February 4, of $968.99 per share. —Fitzgerald
10:13 am: Tech ETF hits record high, momentum trade gains legs
The Technology Select Sector SPDR ETF ( XLK ) rose more than 1% to an all-time high, leading the broader market back to record levels. Shares of Nvidia and Analog Devices led the XLK higher, rising more than 4% each. Tech's move higher was part of a broader trend Wednesday that favored so-called momentum stocks, which are defined by their high growth expectations relative to the broader market. The iShares Edge MSCI USA Momentum ETF ( MTUM ) rose 0.4% and also reached record levels. The iShares Russell 1000 Growth ETF ( IWF ) climbed 0.6% to an all-time high. —Imbert, Francolla
Shares of speculative stocks Tesla , Virgin Galactic and Plug Power each spiked in early Wednesday trading. Shares of all three companies have become favorites among retail investors , with infamous Reddit forum r/wallstreetbets calling for users to buy Plug Power after recent frenzied buying in Tesla and Virgin Galactic. However, CNBC's Jim Cramer said earlier that a rally like the one in Virgin Galactic can end badly . –Sheetz
The S&P 500 jumped 0.4% to a new record about 20 minutes after the open. Tech shares led the way with Apple up 1.1%. The stock has almost completely made up Tuesday's decline following its revenue warning about the coronavirus. - Melloy
The Dow climbed 103 points at the open, poised to snap a three-day losing streak. The S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite also moved up 0.3% and 0.2%, respectively. Apple rebounded from Tuesday's losses, up 0.6%. Tesla shares are on the rise again, surging more than 6% to above $900 a piece.— Li
Shares of the meal kit service slid more than 7% in Wednesday's premarket trading after the company reported disappointing fourth quarter earnings and said that it was considering "strategic alternatives." For the quarter Blue Apron lost $1.66 per share, which was larger than the $1.60 loss analysts polled by FactSet had been expecting. Revenue also missed estimates. As the company struggles – shares have shed more than 80% in the last year – the company said it was exploring options. "These alternatives could include, among other things, a strategic business combination, a capital raise through the public or private markets, a transaction that results in private ownership or sale of the company or its assets, or some combination of these," a press release said. -Stevens
Shares of Garmin gained more than 8% ahead of the market's open following the company's fourth quarter earnings results, which topped analyst expectations on the top and bottom line. The fitness device maker posted earnings of $1.29 per share, compared to the consensus of $1.05, according to estimates from FactSet. Revenue came in at $1.10 billion, ahead of the $1.01 billion expected. The company also gave upbeat guidance, and raised its dividend. -Stevens
The producer price index jumped by 0.5% in January , the biggest one-month advance since October 2018, as costs in health care and hotel accommodation services climbed, the Labor Department said. Wednesday's print easily beat a Reuters estimate of a 0.1% gain. Producer prices also gained 2.1% in the 12 months through January. —Imbert
Shares of Tesla are up nearly 7% in premarket trading on Wednesday after Piper Sandler hiked its price target on the electric car maker to $928 per share, the highest target on Wall Street, according to FactSet. The firm said Tesla's push into new areas of clean energy will drive the stock higher. Tesla's move higher on Wednesday adds to its 100% rally in 2020 alone. – Fitzgerald
Shares of the space tourism company climbed as much as 12% as investors continue to pour into the speculative name . Virgin Galactic 's stock has become the most popular stock on the trading platforms of Fidelity and SoFi. Shares of Richard Branson's space company have gained 223% in the past three months. —Sheetz
Dow Jones Industrial Average futures are trading higher, indicating a gain of more than 80 points at the open. That gain would snap a three-day losing streak for the 30-stock index. S&P 500 futures also rose while Nasdaq 100 futures pointed to record highs for the tech-heavy index. —Imbert
Subscribe to CNBC PRO for exclusive insights and analysis, and live business day programming from around the world.
