This is a live blog. Check back for updates.
The Dow fell 730 points, or 2.84%
The Dow fell 3.31% for the week, its second negative week in three
The Dow is down 1.45% month to date, on pace to break a two-month win streak
The S&P 500 fell 75 points, or 2.42%, its second negative session in three
The S&P 500 fell 2.86% for the week, its second negative week in three
The S&P 500 is down 1.16% month to date, on pace to break a two-month win streak
The Nasdaq Composite fell 260 points, or 2.59%
The Nasdaq fell 1.90% for the week, its second negative week in three
The Nasdaq is up 2.82% this month, on pace for its third positive month in a row
All 11 S&P sectors were negative in Friday's session, led to the downside by communication services, down 4.49%. Utilities was the best performer, down 1.03%
All 11 Sectors were negative for the week, led to the downside by energy, down 6.44%. Tech was the best performer, down 0.45%. —Hayes
The major U.S. indexes all sank on Friday to lock in losses for the week. The Dow lost 730 points, or 2.8%, while the S&P 500 and Nasdaq lost 2.6% and 2.4%, respectively. —Pound
With roughly one hour left of trading, the major averages were on pace to post solid losses as traders worried the latest surge in coronavirus cases would halt the reopening of the economy. The Dow was down more than 600 points, or 2.6%. The S&P 500 traded 2.1% lower along with the Nasdaq Composite. —Imbert
Stocks extended their losses on Friday afternoon, with the Dow briefly falling more than 700 points for the session. The 30-stock average last traded down 670 points, or 2.6%, while the S&P 500 and Nasdaq were both down about 2%. —Pound
CNBC's Senior Markets Commentator Mike Santoli questioned whether markets are returning to 'fretful Fridays,' like they did in February and March. Investors would commonly sell on Friday's assuming more risk of ugly virus headlines over the weekend, said Santoli.
About five stocks declined for every advancer at the New York Stock Exchange as the market faced pressure from surging coronavirus cases. FactSet data shows 2,381 NYSE-listed names were lower, while just 487 traded higher. —Imbert
Consumer goods giant Unilever said Friday they would suspend all advertising on Twitter and Facebook, citing hate speech and polarizing U.S. politics. The news sent Facebook and Twitter shares down by more than 7%. Unilever is not the only company halting its Facebook ads. On Thursday, Verizon said it would do the same. —Imbert
In the midst of a massive spike in coronavirus cases, Florida announced it would suspend "on premises consumption" of alcohol at bars in the state. The news comes after Texas said earlier it will roll back some of its reopening measures as coronavirus infections have also surged there. —Imbert
The major averages were sharply lower around midday as the number of coronavirus cases continues to rise across the U.S. The Dow slid more than 500 points, or 2.1%. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite were both down more than 1%. Friday's declines put the three averages on pace for weekly losses. —Imbert
Chinese officials have reportedly indicated that U.S. involvement in Hong Kong and Taiwan matters could impact purchases of farm goods as outlined by "phase one" of the trade deal, according to The Wall Street Journal . Citing people familiar with the matter, the report said that China remains committed to the trade deal, but officials believe that both sides need to continue to "work together" with the U.S. not "meddling" in the country's dealings with China and Taiwan. On Thursday the U.S. Senate passed legislation imposing sanctions on those who back efforts to restrict Hong Kong's autonomy. – Stevens
Shares of Bed Bath & Beyond jumped 8% on Friday after Bank of America said Buybuy Baby's enterprise value could be equal to nearly all the current enterprise value of Bed Bath & Beyond. "While there are several significant earnings opportunities for the core Bed & Bath Beyond business under strong management, we believe one of the most underappreciated assets of BBBY is its buybuy Baby banner," Bank of America research analyst Curtis Nagle said in a note to clients titled "don't throw this Baby out with the bath water." Bed Bath & Beyond doesn't disclose the baby retailer's metrics but the firm estimates Buybuy Baby is generating at least $1.2 billion in sales, well above the company average. Bank of America — which has a buy rating on Bed Bath & Beyond — hiked its price target to $14.50 per share from $12.50 per share.
Stocks tumbled to their lows of the day around mid-morning, with the Dow sliding more than 600 points, after Texas Gov. Greg Abbott said the state would roll back some reopening measures. "At this time, it is clear that the rise in cases is largely driven by certain types of activities, including Texans congregating in bars," Abbott said in a release. Friday's steep losses put the Dow and S&P 500 down more than 2% each for the week. —Imbert
Shares of Wells Fargo and Capital One tumbled after Morgan Stanley analyst Betsy Graseck said they may be forced to cut their dividends after the Federal Reserve stress test introduced a new rule governing the quarterly payouts.
The Fed released the results of its annual bank exam Thursday, revealing a new formula for dividend payouts that dictates that a lender's dividend cannot exceed its average net income from the previous four quarters.
Based on Graseck's estimates for second-quarter earnings, that means Wells Fargo would need to cut its third-quarter dividend to $0.36 from $0.51, and Capital One would have to slash it to zero, from its current $0.40, the bank analyst wrote Friday in a research report. Shares of Wells Fargo tumbled 4.4% shortly after the open of trading in New York, while Capital One fell 3.5%.
Shares of companies most sensitive to the economy's reopening, including airlines and cruise lines, moved lower on Friday as Covid-19 cases continue to rise in the U.S. Royal Caribbean and Norwegian Cruise Line fell around 3% each, while Carnival Corporation slid 1%. United Airlines dropped more than 5%, while Delta and American were down 3% and 4%, respectively. Casino names also took a hit, with Las Vegas Sands and MGM tumbling more than 2%. – Stevens
Shares of Virgin Galactic opened up as much as 5.6% in trading before slipping, after the space tourism company successfully completed its second glide flight test in New Mexico on Thursday. Virgin Galactic said that, after completing "an extensive data review" of the glide flight, it will begin preparing for full rocket-powered test flights. - Sheetz
Texas Gov. Greg Abbott announced Friday morning that the state is reinstating restrictions on some businesses after the spread of the coronavirus accelerated recently in the state. Under the new rules, bars are closed to in-person customers, while restaurants cannot exceed 50% capacity starting on Monday. Additionally, rafting and tubing businesses must close and local governments must approve outdoor gatherings of more than 100 people. —Pound
The major averages moved lower at the opening bell as bank stocks weighed on the broader market. The Dow dropped 186 points for a loss of 7%. The S&P 500 and Nasdaq Composite were down 0.45% and 0.24%, respectively. The Dow and S&P are on track to end the week lower, while the Nasdaq is set to eke out a small gain. - Stevens
