In the past two weeks, state and local officials in the U.S. and abroad have paused or rolled back reopening plans, some businesses have voluntarily shut their stores, and consumers appear to be responding on their own by staying home and spending less in areas with growing outbreaks.
That comes after rapid progress on reopening the economy, and major rebounds in economic indicators from depressed levels in March and April.
On Tuesday, the Conference Board reported an 11 point rise in the June consumer confidence index, to 98.1 points. Economists’ consensus estimate had been for a 90.6 reading. American households remain more optimistic about the future than their current circumstances: the present situation index component of the survey rose 15.1 points, to 86.2, while  the expectations index rose 9.1 points, to 106.
In China, a survey of factory activity rose to a three-month high . The June manufacturing Purchasing Manager’s Index came in at 50.9, slightly ahead of economists’ expectations and indicating expanding activity.
Asian markets made strong gains overnight following Wall Street’s late rally on Monday. Japan’s Nikkei 225 rose 1.3%, China’s Shanghai Composite gained 0.8%, and South Korea’s KOSPI Composite added 0.7%.
European stocks failed to capitalize on that positive sentiment as the pan-European Stoxx 600 index ticked up just 0.1% on Tuesday.
Read: The Stock Market is Set for One of Its Best Quarters in Decades. Time to Prepare for the Worst
Despite the shaky start to the day, the Stoxx 600 remains on track for its best quarter since the first of 2015. Countries emerging from lockdown, a bumper €1.8 trillion EU recovery fund, and hopes for a vaccine have boosted European stocks over the past three months after their first-quarter slump. The index climbed 12.6% in the second quarter.
Germany’s DAX closed up 0.6% for a second-quarter gain of 23.9%, its best three-month period since May 2009. France’s CAC 40 slipped 0.2% on Tuesday, and the U.K.’s FTSE 100 lost 0.9%. The indexes closed up 12.3% and 8.8%, respectively, in the second quarter.
The price of gold rose 1% on Tuesday, to $1,793 an ounce, ending the second quarter up 13.2%. It’s the metal’s largest gain since the first quarter of 2016, and its highest settle price since October 2012.
Oil fell, with the price of WTI crude settling down 0.8%, at $39.37 a barrel, and the price of Brent crude losing 1.3%, to $41.18 a barrel. Both benchmarks have more than doubled since April.
Royal Dutch Shell (ticker: RDSA) shares fell 3.1% after warning that it will take a $22 billion write-down of its assets due to lower oil and gas prices.
Lululemon (LULU) shares closed up 6% after announcing late Monday that it is buying home-fitness startup Mirror in a $500 million dollar deal . Mirror makes a $1,500 wall-mounted screen that allows users to stream workout classes. The device has seen increasing popularity as fitness enthusiasts have had to come up with novel ways to stay buff and feel the burn while gyms remain closed due to stay-at-home orders.
Wells Fargo (WFC) shares slipped 0.5% as the bank said it expects to decrease its dividend following the results of the Federal Reserve’s annual stress tests. So far, Wells Fargo is the only one of the six big banks to cut its dividend this year, but all have suspended buyback programs.
Uber (UBER) shares climbed 4.9% following reports that it plans to buy food delivery service Postmates for $2.6 billion. The move comes following Uber’s failed attempt to buy Grubhub (GRUB).
