Quotes delayed at least 15 minutes. Real-time quotes provided by BATS BZX Real-Time Price . Market Data provided by Interactive Data ( Terms & Conditions ). Powered and Implemented by Interactive Data Managed Solutions . Company fundamental data provided by Morningstar . Earnings estimates data provided by Zacks. Mutual fund and ETF data provided by Lipper . Economic data provided by Econoday. Dow Jones & Company Terms & Conditions.
This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. ©2020 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. FAQ - Updated Privacy Policy
The markets closed a bit higher at the end of the day, but the Dow Jones, S&P 500 and Nasdaq all ended in the red.
U.S. equity futures are trading lower after bouncing around between gains and losses.
The major futures indexes are indicating a decline of 1.6 percent.
This follows a more than 1,300 point, or 6.3 percent, decline Wednesday in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, which has now lost nearly all of its gains since President Trump's inauguration. The Dow closed at 19,898.92.
The New York Stock Exchange said Wednesday it will temporarily close its iconic trading floor in lower Manhattan and move to all-electronic trading beginning Monday as a precautionary step amid the coronavirus outbreak.
Signs that the outbreak's impact will be far reaching and prolonged have undermined efforts to staunch the bloodletting on the markets.
Even prices for investments seen as very safe, like longer-term U.S. Treasurys, have been slumping as investors rush to raise cash.
The price of oil fell 24 percent on Wednesday, dropping below $21 per barrel for the first time since 2002. By early Thursday, they had recovered some losses, with U.S. crude up 12.3 percent, or $2.51, at $22.88 per barrel in electronic trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
Brent crude, the international standard, was up $1.60 at $26.32 per barrel.
Shares in Asia followed the latest selloff on Wall Street.
Japan's Nikkei gave up 1 percent, Hong Kong's Hang Seng slipped 2.6 percent and China's Shanghai Composite shed 0.9 percent.
Markets have been incredibly volatile for weeks with the rising likelihood that the outbreak will cause a recession.
