Stock market clinches fresh closing records as China says it will slash tariffs on $75 billion in U.S. goods
U.S. stocks closed higher Thursday, seizing a fresh round of records, after the market got another shot of confidence from promised trade tariff reductions.
advanced 63.47 points, or 0.7% to settle at 9,572.15. All three indexes closed at new records.
For the week, the Dow was up 4%, the S&P 500 index gained 3.7%, and the Nasdaq was 4.6% higher.
Signs of further progress in Sino-American trade relations were credited for positive sentiment early Thursday. A viral outbreak thought to have originated in Wuhan City, China, and has thus far claimed more than 560 lives, infecting more than 28,000, meanwhile, has been shoved in to the back burner in the minds of equity investors.
Coronavirus update: 565 deaths, more than 28,000 cases worldwide, Yum China reports ‘significant interruption’
China said that beginning Feb. 14 it would cut in half tariffs on some $75 billion of U.S. imports, as part of its phase-one trade resolution with the U.S., according to China’s Ministry of Finance .
Tariffs on an array of U.S. goods will be reduced from 10% to 5% , and from 5% to 2.5% on others, the ministry said. Retaliatory import levies were imposed in September and December as animosities between the Washington and Beijing intensified.
The ministry said the move was made “in order to promote the healthy and stable development of Sino-U.S. economic and trade relations,” according to a translation of the statement.
“China cutting tariffs is a driver of today’s gains,” said J.J. Kinahan, chief market strategist at TD Ameritrade. “If it weren’t for the huge rally we’ve already seen this week, it’s news that would have ignited the market even more than it already has.”
The tariff cuts come as investors have feared that the novel virus in China would hurt the world’s second-largest economy and make it difficult for it to adhere to promises to boost purchases of U.S. goods and services by $200 billion over two years.
Meanwhile, the Senate on Wednesday acquitted President Donald Trump on impeachment charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress, as expected. He delivered a speech at noon where he described the impeachment as a “terrible ordeal.”
However, markets have focused on a barrage of mostly upbeat economic data.
The number of Americans newly applying for jobless benefits fell 15,000 to 202,000 during the week ended Feb. 1 , near a 50-year low. Productivity growth accelerated in the fourth quarter, the Labor Department said, to 1.4%, below consensus expectations of 1.6% growth, according to a MarketWatch poll.
Which stocks were in focus?
