Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
Such a downward move will bring the S&P more in line with the broader indexes which are already showing the market in a bearish stance. The Dow Jones Transports and the Russell 2000 index, both of which are much more reflective of domestic U.S. economic conditions, have already sliced through their 200-day moving averages in the past two weeks, as the charts here show. Two more broad indexes, the NYSE Composite and the Dow Jones Industrials, slipped below their 200-days Thursday before regaining ground to close above them Friday.
Two broad averages, the Russell 2000, represented by IWM its ETF, and the Dow Jones Transports, are ... [+] in a bearish move, below their 200-day moving averages, in blue.
This doesn’t mean the future is cast in stone. Some, including Scott Wren, the Senior Global Equity Strategist for Wells Fargo Investment Institute, argue the VIX isn’t really a forward-looking indicator but a coincident one, reflecting how traders felt that day. That means projecting ahead based on options activity is meaningless.
Other research sees that the VIX performs closer to its original intent, which is predicting future volatility up or down, rather than solely as a bearish indicator as it's commonly used as today. If that’s true, and the VIX is as likely to tell us the S&P 500 will be 5% higher in a month’s time, then we could be at a fresh all-time high for the S&P in mid-September.
I’ve called Carl Icahn more  than I can remember, split a bottle of wine with Gordon Getty three times and been cursed at by Leon Cooperman more than once. I’ve been
I’ve called Carl Icahn more  than I can remember, split a bottle of wine with Gordon Getty three times and been cursed at by Leon Cooperman more than once. I’ve been writing about investors, markets and economics through three booms and two busts for Forbes, Businessweek, and The Wall Street Journal, among dozens of other outlets. I'm a technical analyst (CFTe) and conduct proprietary research on markets, environmental-focused equities and large individual investors. I'm also Senior Editor at FitchInk, a thought-leadership and editorial shop that collaborates with leading executives and companies.
