The Stock Market Went Wild This Week. Why Next Week Could Be Better.
Market madness. The stock market continues to run around like my son trying to sit through a class on Zoom, although at least today’s market move has an upward trajectory .
After dropping more than 1,800 points on Thursday , the Dow Jones Industrial Average has gained 387.93 points, or 1.5%, while the S&P 500 has risen 1.2%, and the Nasdaq Composite has advanced 1%.
While the gains are good (right now), it has been a messy day. The Dow was once up more than 837.38 points, then up just 54.83 points, before snapping back. The down move was blamed on scary covid numbers out of Florida and South Carolina, prompting fears of a “second wave,” though it’s really more like a continue first wave for these states. The WHO, meanwhile, said the pandemic is “escalating” around the word. For now, though, the market is trying to hold on to its gains.
We shouldn’t read to much into the swings, though. The Cboe Volatility Index ,
      or VIX, is back around 40, which means that stocks are, well, volatile. You don’t need me to tell you that though. Its increased by more than 50% this week, something that has historically been a pretty good sign for investors: The S&P 500 has gone high the following week 71% of the time.
Still, it would be great to see the stock market continue to hold on to today’s gains. If it does, it could be a sign that the worst of the selloff is nearing an end. “[It] will be important on the day if markets can maintain the bounce back from the Florida and S. Carolina case growth news...that led to the decline off the highs,” Evercore ISI’s Dennis DeBusschere writes. “That would show the case growth impact is running its course near term. To be clear, we are not saying the market will maintain the bounce, just that it could be important if it does.”
As it stands, the best performing stocks on the day are of companies that benefit from a reopening, but also got wrecked—that’s a technical term—in Thursday’s selloff. American Airlines (AAL), up 14%, is the S&P 500’s best-performer after saying in a filing that business continues to improve . Of course, it dropped 16% yesterday. Airlines are so strong that even downgrades don’t matter: United Airlines has gained 14% after getting cut to Neutral from Outperform at Credit Suisse, while Spirit Airlines has risen 13% after getting cut to Sell at the same investment bank.
Some of the biggest losers, meanwhile, are companies that are seen as beneficiaries of the shutdown. Domino’s Pizza (DPZ) has dropped 3% despite having its target price to $445 from $425 at Wedbush. Netflix has fallen 2% because it is, well, Netflix.
Still, not every reopening beneficiary is catching a big. PVH (PVH), down 8.9%, is the S&P 500’s worst performer after reporting a first-quarter loss of $3.03 , much larger than analyst expectations for a loss of $1.60.
Even in a market as wild as this, sometimes company news matters.
The Stock Market Went Wild This Week. Why Next Week Could Be Better.
