Stocks plunged last week over escalating fears of the    coronavirus' spread and the damage it could inflict on global    economies.
The market sell-off erased $6 trillion of market value,    according to S&P Dow Jones Indices.
Three charts illustrate why the stock market bears    little short-term impact on most people's lives.
Most Americans don't own stock, and those that do skew    wealthier. And under half of families have retirement    accounts.
Visit    Business Insider's homepage for more stories.
Stocks plunged last week and entered a correction amid escalating  fears of the coronavirus' spread and the damage it could inflict  on the global economy. When all was said and done, the S&P 500 had suffered its worst week since the financial  crisis - October 2008 to be exact.
The drubbing erased more than $6 trillion in market value in just  five days, according to S&P Dow Jones Indices senior analyst  Howard Silverblatt.
The sell-off was fueled by concerns that efforts to contain the  virus could stymie economic growth and cut corporate profits. The coronavirus has spread to over 55 countries beyond its point  of origin in China, infecting over 83,000 people around the  world.
On Thursday, the S&P 500 posted its fastest correction - defined as a 10% drop from  its recent peak - since the Great Depression.
The Dow Jones industrial average and Nasdaq Composite index are  also down at least 10% from their latest highs. The Dow alone  lost over 3,000 points last week. The losses could wreak havoc on  the economy if it spirals into recession, though that outcome is still very uncertain.
But it won't immediately impact their day-to-day existences.
"For most Americans, it's a side show in their economic lives,"  Jacob Hacker, director of the Institute for Social and Policy  Studies at Yale University, told USA Today about the stock market. "What really matters  to them is the security of their jobs and health care, and the  amount they have to pay for big-ticket items like housing and  education."
Here are three charts illustrating why the stock market bears  little short-term impact on most people.
Most Americans simply don't invest in stocks.
The chart above shows the share of Americans in each part of the  wealth distribution who directly own stocks.
Data from the Federal Reserve shows that only 8% in the bottom half of household net worth own  stock shares. That's compared to 89% in the upper half of the  distribution.
Just over half - 51% - are in the wealthiest 10% of US  households.
That trend locks out a substantial share of Americans from  reaping the benefits of a booming market - or the effects of one  that plummets.
The amount and value of stock holdings skews heavily towards the richest Americans.
The average family among the top 10% of US households who own  stock tend to have portfolios worth $200,000 and above, according  to the Federal Reserve - at least 60x more than the bottom half  of the wealth distribution.
As a result, stock losses would hit those with much higher  incomes initially.
Less than half of Americans in the bottom half of the wealth distribution had money invested into retirement accounts.
Under half of Americans in the bottom half of the wealth  distribution had money invested into retirement accounts, which  includes IRAs, 401(k)s or similar.
In 2017, the US Census Bureau reported only a third of  workers contributed to a 401(k) plan.
Of course, the recent stock market losses puts a dent in their  savings.
Nearly half of families in America don't have any retirement  savings at all, according to a study from the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute.
