Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome Powell.
U.S. stocks booked significant gains Wednesday, after Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell vowed to mount a robust and protracted fight to offset fallout from the coronavirus pandemic, which he said “will weigh heavily” on economic activity, employment and inflation in the near term.
How did major indexes fare?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
added 76.12 points, or 2.7%, to close at 2,939.51. The Nasdaq Composite COMP,
advanced 306.98 points, or 3.6%, ending at 8,914.71.
The Russel 2000 Index RUT,
, which tracks smaller companies, rose 4.8%, or 66.38 points, to finish at 1,360.46.
On Tuesday, stocks gave up early gains to end lower, with the Dow snapping a four-day winning streak to close at 24,101.55, down 32.23 points, or 0.1%. The S&P 500 lost 15.09 points, or 0.5%, to close at 2,863.39, while the Nasdaq Composite settled at 8,607.73, down 122.43 points, or 1.4%.
Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said he expects the pandemic to weigh heavily on the U.S. economy, but also that the central banks is ready to bolster its unprecedented array of stimulus measures already in force.
The Fed’s emergency credit facilities are “wide open” and “we can do more of that,” Powell in a press conference following the two-day policy meeting. He also said the Fed’s support is based on “lending, not spending,” with the caveat that the central bank can’t make outright grants or lend to insolvent businesses.
“It may well be the case that the economy needs more support,” Powell said. “For now, we think our current stance is appropriate.”
Economists expected the Fed to reassure investors and the public that it will try to cushion the largest economic downturn since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
“There’s no question that they have been much more proactive than in 2008,” Tim Courtney, chief investment officer at Exencial Wealth Advisors, told MarketWatch in an interview. “The amount of money they’re looking to potentially pump into market, that supports equity valuations as well.”
The central bank has unleashed a series of emergency measures since March in response to the coronavirus crisis. The Fed cut its policy interest rate to nearly zero, started an open-ended bond-buying program, and moved to backstop loans to Main Street and Wall Street to ensure financial markets continue to function.
Powell also said Wednesday that the Fed was in no hurry to push benchmark interest rates higher, but to expect several of its credit facilities to be up and running soon.
Read: Here’s the latest on the Fed’s actions to keep credit flowing to the U.S. economy
“The overarching theme of today’s FOMC statement and press conference was that the Fed is committed to doing ‘whatever it takes,’ and more, just to make sure as strong as possible a recovery can be reestablished,” said BlackRocks’ chief investment officer Rick Reider, in emailed commentary.
Stocks received an early boost after Gilead Sciences Inc. said Wednesday morning that a government-run clinical trial evaluating its experimental drug remdesivir in certain COVID-19 patients met the study’s main goal. The announcement stirred hopes that pharmaceutical companies were making progress toward a treatment of COVID-19, but investors are still awaiting details from the study.
See: Gilead reports early positive data in remdesivir studies as COVID-19 drug, though Chinese trial sees no benefit
The news helped to outweigh the bearish impact of a sharp slump in U.S. economic growth in the first quarter, with gross domestic product shrinking by 4.8% on an annualized basis.
Economists surveyed by MarketWatch, on average, were looking for a 3.9%  fall in GDP after a 2.1% expansion in the fourth quarter. The first-quarter decline is expected to be only a foretaste of the economic carnage caused by the pandemic lockdowns in the current quarter, but some investors are already looking into the future.
In other U.S. data, pending home sales fell to its lowest level since 2011.
“What the Fed is doing is a real confidence builder, and that brings money off the sidelines into riskier assets,” Bruce Bittles, chief investment strategist at Robert W. Baird & Co., told MarketWatch.
He also pointed to significant gains this week in stock benchmarks that track smaller business as a sign of the more bullish market sentiment.
“That’s what we’ve seen in the past three days, which suggests the rally since March 23 is more than a rally and could transform in to a new bull market.”
The global tally of COVID-19 cases climbed to 3.13 million on Wednesday, according to data aggregated by Johns Hopkins University. The U.S. has the highest number of cases at 1.01 million and the highest death toll at 58,355.
Investors also have been sifting through another deluge of first-quarter earnings reports, including a  round of behemoths reporting after the bell Wednesday
Which companies were in focus?
