Broader market pressured as COVID-19 cases surge in China, U.S.
finished up 1.4%, rebounding from losses early in Monday’s session.
In the U.S., COVID-19 deaths topped 115,000 amid a new spike in cases in states like Florida and Texas, where shelter-in-place measures have been gradually relaxed, while in China, a spike in new cases in Beijing prompted the closure of the city’s largest wholesale food market.
In a note Monday, BofA Securities highlighted tech stocks that were benefiting from higher spending because of COVID-19 and singled out Zoom as leading in terms of name recognition when it comes to videoconferencing software.
“Modern and video-first solutions like Zoom quickly rose to the occasion and have become household names,” BofA said. “Zoom has virtually achieved verbal dominance over an entire category of digital experience, similar to Google’s dominance of the search market.”
, both of which also compete in the videoconferencing space.
Other beneficiaries from the COVID-19-prompted tech migration are Salesforce.com Inc. CRM,
Based on a survey of 500 representatives in IT, engineering, sales, marketing and management, BofA said that about 47% of respondents said they expect remote work to become more of a normal practice post-pandemic.
Shares of other cloud-based software companies and cybersecurity companies that support shelter-in-place/work-from-home infrastructure also outperformed the broader market.
all finished higher than the broader market Monday.
For the year, the ETFMG Prime Cyber Security ETF HACK,
Workhorse's stock set to snap record win streak, while BTIG analyst nearly doubles price target
Shares of Workhorse Group Inc.  are down 4% in Wednesday trading, putting them on track to snap a record 9-day winning streak in which they rocketed more than 4-fold (up 321%). Analyst Gregory Lewis at BTIG reiterated his buy rating on the electric van maker's stock but boosted his price target to $26, which is 77% above current levels, from $10. Lewis said a key takeaway from a call he hosted with management on Tuesday was that the company has "first-mover" advantage, which was solidified when the Series C van received final regulatory safety approvals, giving the company a 1-to-2-year head start on other electric vehicle (EV) last-mile delivery competitors. He said this should allow the company to secure a revolving credit facility, which would allow it to scale up operations. Lewis said a major potential catalyst could be a $6 billion to $8 billion contract from the U.S. Postal Service, in which bids are due later this month, and an announcement of the winner is expected later this year. He said another bullish factor is the optionality around the company's 10% equity stake in Lordstown Motors Corp., which unveiled its EV Endurance pickup truck last week. The stock has skyrocketed 881% over the past three months. Among its EV rivals, shares of Tesla Inc.  have run up 133% the past three months and Nikola Corp.  have climbed 537%, while the S&P 500  has gained 26%.
