Despite its staunchest supporters and analysts singing its praises on socials, though, XRP is likely to face a number of struggles next year. Here are the top three.
Probably the greatest challenge that XRP holders have to face is the continual dumping of the token, not to mention the media attention surrounding these events. With its co-founder, Jed McCaleb, constantly offloading onto the market, along with an undisclosed settlement with R3, XRP hodlers seem to be at the constant mercy of large bag holders; perhaps more so than with other crypto projects.
There are simply too many XRP tokens in circulation. This causes it to hemorrhage value through ongoing giveaways and oversupply.
On top of that, there are still more than 200 more monthly tranches of over 220 million XRP tokens to be released by Ripple–just waiting to be dumped.
With investor confidence waning amid continued dumping, as well as XRP at a 2-year low and dropping (down 16% in 48 hours), it’s hard to see any signs of bullish support right now.
Unless, of course, you subscribe to InvestingHaven’s bullish projection. Could Ripple’s coin really perform like silver in 2002? Is it really just a question of increasing adoption? Perhaps:
Ripple and XRP are only now starting to get traction, they solve a huge real life problem and customer testimonials are amazingly promising.
There may be a large enough use case for XRP moving forward for it to thrive… But it’s going to have to corner the market fast over the next 12 months.
If XRP is going to prove its worth to the world, it’s going to have to do it soon. 2020 is already lining up to be the year of the race of the Sovereign digital currencies and bank-issued stablecoins.
With the competition hotting up from China to the Marshall Islands , more and more countries are looking interested in launching their own digital currencies.
With corporations like Facebook and banks like JPMorgan all throwing their hats in the ring too, XRP is going to have to fight tooth and nail to stay relevant as a cross-border payment solution in 2020.
What do you think Ripple’s biggest challenges will be going into 2020? Add your thoughts below!
