This also means more inflow of USDT speculation for the XRP market, as the new perpetuity will be open to large stablecoin owners to open and settle positions.
After an underwhelming December, XRP slid to as low as $0.18. At that level, the community lost some of its hopes, but buyers kept stocking up on the asset in case of a rogue rally. Now that the rally is here, the hype may accelerate, with higher volatility expectations.
$XRP #Ripple – Daily chart – Major BB pinch forming, should see volality soon #TheStandard pic.twitter.com/boZaU6D4VV
— Big Cheds (@BigCheds) January 5, 2020
The seasonal hype after the New Year, plus renewed activity after the end of the holidays, boosted XRP trading. Volumes are expanding slowly, to around $1.6 billion per day. This amount is still relatively small in comparison to other leading coins, but low volumes also make it easier for XRP to begin a price hike.
Now that bitcoin has escaped some of the most bearish scenarios for January, XRP appears to have gained confidence. Within minutes, the asset started a minor recovery, from 2,600 Satoshi to above 2,700 Satoshi. With increased BTC stability, and a hike for the leading coin above $7,500, the number 3 cryptocurrency is also adding to its confidence.
Another reason for the spike may be from insider trading, as the rally suspiciously happened just before the official Binance announcement was released. There’s no evidence to support this claim, but it is highly coincidental that XRP price rose so dramatically ahead of a major announcement.
What's interesting though is that XRP pumped about 10% right before the announcement. Could be a coincidence but pic.twitter.com/bpybZ7iWse
— Larry Cermak (@lawmaster) January 6, 2020
Added to the recent positive XRP performance is the statement by Brad Garlinghouse that Ripple cannot control XRP valuations. Despite the regular escrow tranches, Ripple has announced it does not intend to sell off the coins directly.
Yes, Ripple owns a lot of XRP, we’re very interested in the success of XRP, but the accusations of us dumping, that’s not in our best interests to do that
For the asset, some of the most extreme predictions allow for displacing BTC. However, for now, the coin is fighting to regain positions and confidence. XRP has suffered from the general skepticism about altcoins.
What do you think of the XRP rally? Share your thoughts in the comments section below!
