A company tied to Wall Street recently sold a massive Bitcoin fund, believed to be valued around $140 million.
The company also requested an exemption from the US sec, due to it being a pooled investment fund.
Similar examples of traditional and crypto sectors clashing have emerged all throughout the industry.
The New York Digital Investment Group (NYDIG) recently sold a previously-unknown Bitcoin fund worth $140 million. The fund’s formal name is NYDIG Bitcoin Yield Enhancement Fund LP. The company described it as a pooled investment fund.
The fund started selling only recently, less than a week ago. According to reports , the company disclosed selling $140 million in a Form D filing for an exemption to the US SEC. The firm already had a license to work with cryptocurrencies since 2018, when it received a BitLicense from the state of New York.
As mentioned, the fund emerged fairly recently, on May 5th. It is a pooled investment fund, categorized as such due to it having multiple investors during the initial capital raise. As such, NYDIG believes that it deserves exemption under the Regulation D safe harbor protections’ Rule 506(b).
Interestingly enough, there is not much more that is known about this particular fund. Recent reports particularly stress that. However, there are some additional pieces of information that may be relevant.
For example, one of the NYDIG’s earlier investments, known as the Bitcoin Strategy Fund, was advised by a firm Stone Ridge Asset Management LCC. This is an investment management firm from New York, and it has ties to Benjamin Lawsky. Lawsky, on the other hand, is known for a lot of things, including being the one who established a framework for BitLicense. He is also a board member at Ripple,
There are other examples of crypto and traditional finance worlds meeting. One of them includes a recent announcement by Canada’s 3iQ Corp, a large digital asset fund manager. The firm revealed that The Bitcoin Fund managed to complete an offering of Class F Units and Class A Units. Class F Units were sold for $11.63, while Class A Units sold for $11.87. In total, the gross proceeds included around $48 million.
Another event that made headlines was Paul Tudor Jones II admitting that he is buying Bitcoin due to the world central banks’ money printing . The prominent traditional investor decided to abandon tradition and go down the path of ‘modern’ finance as he expects large inflation rates later down the road.
Of course, he added that only 1% of his assets is in Bitcoin. However, the move could inspire other investors to go crypto, as well. Bitcoin has received a lot of support due to its performance during the coronavirus pandemic. Even those who were previously skeptical about it are now giving it a chance. If you are interested in learning more about it, you can do so here .
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
