Seeing athletes of any age playing sports again is a fantastic sight — especially the younger children.
Little League baseball and softball is in full swing. Travel sports are happening and recreational leagues are off and running.
It is important that these athletes have the opportunity to play full seasons. For that to happen, everyone should do their part in an effort to keep players, coaches and fans safe.
Wearing masks in your day to day activities is one simple way to help. If you are at a field or in a gym watching your son or daughter play while keeping a safe distance from others without a mask is understandable. However, not wearing a mask to go into a store, restaurant or bar where there are a number of people who you have no idea where they have traveled or who they’ve been around puts not only yourself at risk but others as well.
Wearing a mask is not the most enjoyable thing to do by any means. But putting one on is a safe way to protect the people you encounter on a daily basis. More people are engaging in typical activities these days with the majority of the state in the green phase. However, some people are leaving their masks at home.
The numbers don’t lie. Coronavirus cases across the area are spiking. There are 61 total cases in Somerset County and 77 in Cambria County as of Sunday. It is only a matter of time before this pandemic hits closer to home if it has not already.
Someone reading this column might think that this is nothing more than a lecture — it’s not. It is simply a writer hoping that the games continue and the athletes will have the chance to play out their seasons in a safe atmosphere.
Parents, athletes and members of the media all want to see sports continue or begin again. It does not take much to do your part and put on a mask, wash your hands and follow proper safety precautions when out and about.
The athletes should not be punished and have their seasons come to a halt because of people around them who believe masks don’t provide a form of protection. Nor should the people who have been putting safety first and wearing a mask this entire pandemic.
Some athletes have already missed out on one scholastic sports season this spring. Why should anyone jeopardize another season this fall by being selfish and going into a crowded place without a mask on?
Schools and sports reopening and beginning in the fall are going to look very different. There may not be a sense of normalcy with either until late 2021.
But by doing our part and wearing masks, it helps provide student-athletes an opportunity for in-person learning and champions to be crowned this fall.
