The founder of Tesla and SpaceX, Elon Musk, refers to Bitcoin after causing a slump in the stocks of the electric car manufacturer.
Musk is a BTC investor and has spoken out for the cryptocurrency.
Tesla and SpaceX founder Elon Musk wrote a tweet that allegedly caused the shares of the electric car manufacturer to cost billions of dollars. Musk, known for his risky remarks and for having gone off the rails, said on Twitter that he thought Tesla shares were overvalued. As a result, the company’s stock suffered losses of an estimated $10 billion within a few hours.
— Elon Musk (@elonmusk) May 1, 2020
Consequently, the tweet received numerous negative comments from Tesla investors who suffered losses due to Musk’s Post. While other users pointed out that the market had already suffered losses before the tweet, another user responded to Musk:
Dude…I just lost $10k because of this tweet. Wtf is wrong with u.
In the crypto-community, Musk’s tweet triggered a wave of memes and similar publications. While TRON ‘s CEO, Justin Sun, simply tweeted “buy Bitcoin”, others, like Binance CEO Changpeng Zhao, hoped that Musk could do the opposite for Bitcoin by tweeting about the BTC price:
1 tweet and 10 Billion Dollars gone. Let’s try the reverse. I hope he tweets BTC, is too low.
Musk also received a reply from the verified Bitcoin account on the social network. The account manager tweeted by imitating Tesla’s CEO, but with the cryptocurrency.
The @Bitcoin account has been criticized in the past. Some community members claim that the account managers violate Bitcoin’s fundamental principles of decentralization. In addition, they have accused the account of promoting scams. However, Musk responded with laughter and asked the account how much they would charge for a “Bitcoin anime”.
How much for some anime Bitcoin? pic.twitter.com/itqRslFNcb
— Elon Musk (@elonmusk) May 1, 2020
Musk is a advocate of Bitcoin and an investor with an estimated amount of 0.25 BTC, as he stated in February 2019. About Bitcoin, Musk said it is a “very brilliant” invention and a better medium for value transfers than conventional money:
Yeah. Paper money is going away, and crypto is a far better way to transfer value than pieces of paper, that’s for sure.
