Crypto analyst recently shared on Twitter that the XRP price's recent drop is only a sign of a major correction that will soon follow.
The analyst even believes that the XRP price might get cut in half in the near future.
Many others disagree, claiming that XRP could, instead, surge up, and they pointed out a number of reasons why this might happen.
Over the past several days, the crypto market did not see a lot in terms of positive development. Bitcoin saw a major drop after managing to breach the $10,000 mark and go all the way up to $10,200. Soon after, this resulted in an immediate correction that knocked the price down by $500, leading the coin back to $9,700.
However, BTC is not the only crypto to see a major drop. The third-largest coin by market cap , XRP , saw a major drop as well, going from $0.288 to $0.269. Now, one crypto analyst warns that the drop might be only a first wave of a much larger correction that will cut XRP price in half.
coin’s price really drop by as much as 50%, especially now, during the period
that many believe is among the strongest bull markets in years. Crypto analyst
known on Twitter as il Capo of Crypto believes that it could. In fact, the
to hold in a $0.28 region.
bearish sign and expects very negative consequences. The level in question
previously acted as resistance and support in the last several years. However,
Capo expects it to be a resistance for quite some time, and to cause strong
rejections whenever the price approaches it. He also sees the possibility of
XRP dropping to $0.13-0.15 range in months to come.
— il Capo Of Crypto (@CryptoCapo_) February 10, 2020
He has a similar negative prediction for BTC,
now, as well. Of course, many do not agree with such grim predictions, stating
that the small rejection will not impact the long-term bullish trend.
Josh Olszewicz of Brave New Coin even provided his reasons why XRP will surge. He said that the coin went beyond the Kumo band of the Ichimoku Cloud indicator, that the 200-day exponential moving average was surmounted by XRP in recent days, and that the crypto looks ready to invalidate a 700day bearish pitchfork formation soon.
week’s candle above the $0.28 level, which is seen as a major move for the
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
