Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
"I'm thinking about forking XRP so we don’t have to deal with the founders dumping," Twitter user and XRP investor CryptoBitlord, wrote last week . "This will be a community effort."
"[Ripple chief executive] Brad Garlinghouse, [and Ripple chief technology officer] Joel Katz, you now have 60 days to stop dumping XRP or we will stage a community takeover. If it’s a decentralized network like you say, we have the power to do it."
The XRP price has slumped some 25% so far this year, while bitcoin has risen around 200%, with bitcoin's dominance, a measure of its weighting compared the rest of the cryptocurrency market, now at 70% according to CoinMarketCap data—its highest in 18 months.
Garlinghouse defended Ripple's sale of the tokens, saying: "Reality is we decreased our sales by volume quarter on quarter and since then the inflation rate of XRP circulating supply has been lower than that of bitcoin and ether."
The bitcoin price rebounded after a sudden sell-off last week.
A change.org petition calling on Ripple to stop "dumping" XRP has secured almost 3,000 signatures since it was created last month.
"Ripple continue dumping billions of XRP on us, crashing the price," the petition reads.
"Its amazing this sort of behavior is widely accepted in the crypto world. Sure we know that XRP is a solid coin with major potential but this needs to stop!"
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
