Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
U.S. stocks look to be headed for further declines at Thursday’s open despite U.S. president Donald Trump making a bid to assuage concerns over the coronavirus outbreak.
Trump tapped vice president Mike Pence to lead the country’s efforts against the disease while saying the risk to Americans remains "very low" even as health authorities warned of community spreading following the confirmation of a first case of unknown origin in northern California.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average has lost more than 2,000 points this week, falling for the fifth day straight yesterday, along with the S&P 500. The Dow is, meanwhile, on track for its worst percentage-point weekly performance since 2008.
Bitcoin recorded a strong start to 2020 , climbing back above the psychological $10,000 per bitcoin mark , first appearing to be boosted by geopolitical fears surrounding the escalating tensions between the U.S. and Iran and then apparently gaining on fears the coronavirus could knock global trade .
With bitcoin's latest fall in the face of global market turmoil, the theory that it had begun acting as a safe haven along with gold and the Japanese yen is looking overblown.
"Bitcoin has been uncorrelated to other asset classes," bitcoin and crypto analyst at Coinist Research, Luke Martin, said via Twitter .
"If stocks drop, this does not mean bitcoin has to pump. If gold prices climb, this does not mean bitcoin will rise with it every time," Martin said, adding "narratives will come and go."
"Bitcoin as uncorrelated has always been the narrative base case," added independent crypto strategist Nathaniel Whittemore.
The bitcoin price has slumped over the last few days after a brief period of relative stability.
Bitcoin and cryptocurrency market watchers appear to have returned to assessing bitcoin based on its own metrics.
"Bitcoin’s value isn’t derived from the same indicators as fiat, such as interest rates and GDP," said the chief executive of crypto social trading platform HedgeTrade, Dave Waslen. "Bitcoin is purely driven by demand which is why it often remains steady when other markets are teetering."
Looking ahead into 2020, bitcoin traders and investors have a lot to feel bullish about.
Elsewhere, bitcoin is expected to be upgraded in a so-called soft fork later this year, a development that's been called "one of the most innovative additions" that bitcoin's had .
The soft fork, which is a change to a cryptocurrency's protocol that doesn't require all nodes to be updated and is backward-compatible, is expected to improve bitcoin's privacy and scalability.
U.S. coffee chain Starbucks will be its first launch partner, with the company one of the original backers of the crypto project, along with software giant Microsoft and Boston Consulting Group.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
