Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
The ranking of U.S.-based firms, put together by professional social network LinkedIn , analyses companies' popularity using employee growth, job seeker interest and member engagement.
Meanwhile, Gemini Trust Company, the custodian of the Winklevoss twins' Gemini crypto exchange , and ethereum development firm ConsenSys dropped out of the list entirely from the 25th and the 26th spots respectively last year.
Both Coinbase and Ripple have struggled recently as competition, regulation and lower-than-hoped-for bitcoin and crypto adoption have weighed on their bottom lines.
Last month, London-based Barclays bank ended its relationship with Coinbase which began in March last year as it expanded into Europe.
Meanwhile, the price of Ripple's XRP has slumped some 25% so far this year , while bitcoin has risen around 200%, with bitcoin's dominance, a measure of its weighting compared the rest of the cryptocurrency market, now at 70% according to CoinMarketCap data—its highest in 18 months.
Ripple has struggled to keep up with expectations over recent months after a flurry of major financial services companies signed up to its products last year.
Elsewhere on LinkedIn's U.S. startup top 10, Snowflake Computing, a cloud-based data-warehousing startup, came in at number one, while crypto-friendly investment app Robinhood placed seventh.
The bitcoin price explosion over the last couple of years has made many investors and companies ... [+] suddenly worth millions.
This is the last year that both Coinbase and Ripple will be eligible for the list, which excludes companies over seven years old. Both Coinbase and Ripple were founded in 2012.
Other stipulations are that companies have at least 50 employees, are headquartered in the U.S. and are privately held.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
