If you’ve spent any time on online forums relating to Ripple at all, one of the things you will often come across is someone proclaiming: “Ripple isn’t a true cryptocurrency”. There is no precise definition of what constitutes a cryptocurrency, but following Bitcoin’s lead, it is fair to define a crypto as a digital asset that is designed to be used as a medium of exchange and uses cryptography to secure transactions on a decentralised network. The reason that leads sceptics to claim Ripple isn’t a crypto is that the Ripple company has control over who can actually process XRP transactions. This renders the Ripple network a centralised and permissioned network, making XRP a centralised crypto. This lack of the decentralisation causes much controversy about Ripple’s status within the crypto community.
Is XRP a pump and dump scam?
There is a substantial and growing voice within the crypto community that is convinced that Ripple and XRP are just one big scam. The argument for the Ripple business being a pump and dump scheme is as follows. It must be noted that Ripple partakes in numerous activities to increase the value of XRP, but unlike traditional pump and dumps, Ripple attempts to obscure their link to XRP.
The alleged scam begins with the issuance of 100 billion XRP tokens at once that have no value independent of the Ripple project – they are only used within the Ripple network to process transactions. This is a good time to mention that Ripple offers two main products for cross border payments: xCurrent and xRapid. xCurrent, the more popular product, doesn’t use XRP to process transactions. In an attempt to hide behind the scheme’s intentions, the company claimed that XRP was issued by an open source ‘community’. Technically, Ripple (the company) didn't issue XRP, however 20% of XRP was kept by the founders, Chris Larsen and Jeb McCaleb, and the remaining 80% was gifted to the company.
To this day, the company holds around 60% of the total amount of XRP.
Ripple boasts a vast array of institutional clients such as Nomura and Santander, but under further examination it would seem that most companies are ‘partners’ as opposed to clients, who receive XRP as a reward. In short, Ripple is using its share of XRP to create the mirage that it has paying customers.
Now this isn’t to say that the Ripple network itself is useless. Ripple provides a quick and easy international payment system by all accounts. But the idea of holding XRP akin to the way people hold Bitcoin is ludicrous according to the sceptics of the crypto community. Seeing as most XRP is held by the founders and the company, who regularly publicise just how great the Ripple network is, often leading to surges in price, it is easy to buy into this idea of a pump and dump.
If one thing is clear, it’s that Ripple (XRP) was designed to process transactions and that owning XRP is not the same as owning equity in Ripple. Given the bizarre price movements of Ripple, it might seem that it is not a ‘cryptocurrency’ to be holding, but one to be swing trading with the utmost caution.
Trade Bitcoin and Ripple CFDs with Capital.com.
