Blockchain firm Ripple raised $200 million in its Series C funding round, the startup announced Friday , bringing its valuation to $10 billion.
The funding round was led by New York investment firm Tetragon and will be used to expedite hiring, Ripple said in a statement .
The firm rose to fame in 2017 when its XRP cryptocurrency shot up in value alongside most digital coins.
XRP rose as much as 4% on the news.
Blockchain firm Ripple announced it raised $200 million in its latest investment round, bringing the company's valuation to $10 billion.
The startup surged to fame in 2017 when its XRP cryptocurrency shot up in value during the digital currency boom. Its Series C funding round was helmed by New York investment firm Tetragon and included backing from Japan-based SBI Holdings and venture capital firm Route 66 Ventures.
"We are in a strong financial position to execute against our vision," CEO Brad Garlinghouse said in a statement . "As others in the blockchain space have slowed their growth or even shut down, we have accelerated our momentum and industry leadership throughout 2019."
XRP traded as much as 4% higher on the news.
Ripple uses XRP for cross-border payments within its network of financial institutions. It also utilizes a messaging system that's used by banks around the world to send money. The cryptocurrency traded at more than $3 in early January 2018, but has since fallen to $0.19 per coin as most digital currencies have shed value.
Ripple funds much of its operations by selling its position in XRP. The startup sold $260 million worth of the cryptocurrency in the last year alone, according to The Block .
The firm announced it now works with more than 300 partners around the world and achieved 900% year-over-year growth for transactions on its network.
Ripple will use the investment to expedite hiring and "better serve its growing community of customers and partners," according to a statement.
XRP is down roughly 44% year-to-date.
Now read more markets coverage from Markets Insider and Business Insider:
