Home » Cryptocurrency » Ripple » Chris Larsen, Ripple’s co-founder recovers from COVID-19
Chris Larsen recovers from COVID-19 and urges recovered patients to donate blood.
Ripple Labs donated £162,853 to help combat the COVID-19 pandemic.
YouTube scammer impersonates Ripple’s Brad Garlinghouse to swindle unalert crypto users.
Chris Larsen, Ripple’s co-founder and executive chairman has recovered from COVID-19 fully. He unveiled this positive news through a tweet on April 2, thanking the people that are working on the frontline to combat the virus. He also called upon other recovered patients to donate blood that doctors can use in antibody transplants.
Thank you to everyone on the frontlines keeping us safe – am truly grateful to report that I’ve made a full recovery from #COVID19 . If you’ve recovered from the virus, please consider donating your blood to help with antibody transplants: https://t.co/icm06Et5fr pic.twitter.com/331Mjv43Z6
— Chris Larsen (@chrislarsensf) April 2, 2020
The blood of recovered patients contains antibodies. Due to this, doctors can use it to help boost the immune systems of very ill patients. As a result, they stand a chance against the virus before it overwhelms them.
The news of Larsen’s recovery comes days after Ripple Labs donated £162,853 to help combat the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in the US. Ripple divided these funds between two non-profit organizations, namely Tipping Point Emergency’s Response Fund and the Silicon Valley Community Foundation’s COVID Regional Response Fund.
nonprofit works to fight poverty in California. It has a network of partners
the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic throughout the Silicon Valley area.
panic due to the COVID-19 pandemic, scammers have continued targeting the
He posted a tweet saying,
Enough is enough — in a time of global crisis, when people are especially vulnerable — social platforms need to hold scammers (crypto and otherwise) accountable for stealing money from innocent victims with fake giveaways. (1/2) https://t.co/wxrF4J3JWu
— Brad Garlinghouse (@bgarlinghouse) March 25, 2020
Do you think leveraging blockchain technology can help social platforms identify and bring crypto scammers to justice easily? Share your thoughts in the comments below.
