Fiat-backed stablecoins will be available for trading on top of Ripple's XRP ledger.
It will be available from next year via a new platform, "Sologenic."
Crypto exchange Coinfield has recently announced that it will make stocks such as Tesla and Apple tradable on the popular XRP ledger (XRPL). Coinfield’s CEO Bob Ras reported that stocks and ETFs from more than 25 global stock exchanges. He also stated that fiat-backed stablecoins will be available for trading on top of Ripple's XRP ledger. It will be available from next year via a new platform, "Sologenic". Ras said:
“It’s an ecosystem, merging traditional financial market assets—non-blockchain financial systems—with crypto assets,” he said. "We offer our customers the ability to tokenize any asset on demand. Users can tokenize over 30,000 stocks and ETFs.”
Coinfield’s own crypto Solos (Ƨ,) serves as a bridge between crypto-assets and stocks or ETFs. Solo is directly paired with fiat and used as collateral to settle transactions with third-party brokerage firms. For example, Tesla shares and USD would become TSLA and USDƨ, respectively, after they are converted to a tokenized stablecoin version. These stablecoins are tradable against XRP and Solo on CoinField’s exchange and the XRPL DEX .
“We offer users ability to tokenize any asset, or fiat. A user from, say, Japan can tokenize fiat on top of XRPL and they can move their funds almost instantly to the XRP blockchain,” said Ras. “We’re helping [with the] mass adoption of cryptocurrencies, and we get more users to invest in the stock market.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
