Economy 3 hours ago (Jul 04, 2020 13:05)
Investing.com - After wrapping up its best quarter in decades, stocks on Wall Street kicked off the third quarter with more gains as the economy tries to recover from the coronavirus pandemic.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 3.3% this week while the S&P 500 jumped 4% in the same time period. It was the Dow and S&P 500′s biggest weekly gains since June 5.
The tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite , meanwhile, climbed 4.6% this week for its biggest weekly increase since May 8.
The strong weekly gains follow the market’s best quarterly performance in decades. The Dow ended the second quarter with a 17.8% gain, its biggest quarterly rally since 1987.
The S&P 500 scored its biggest single-quarter surge since 1998, soaring nearly 20%.
Meanwhile, the Nasdaq soared 30.6% for the quarter, its best quarterly performance since 1999.
Stocks have rallied sharply in recent months, with all three benchmarks up more than 40% from their lows set on March 23 - when coronavirus-related lockdowns shocked the stock market - as a barrage of stimulus from the Federal Reserve and the U.S. government boosted risk appetite.
To see more of Investing.com’s weekly comics, visit: http://www.investing.com/analysis/comics
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read and understood Investing.com UK's comment guidlines and agree to the terms described.
