Oil prices went negative earlier in the week — a first. The world is awash in crude oil, with no relief in sight. The ripple effect will be felt all along the energy industry supply chain, with significant impacts to Texas.
On Monday, just ahead of futures contract expirations, the price of West Texas Intermediate, or WTI, crude oil did something it’s never done — it went negative, all the way down to minus $37.63 per barrel.
In short, U.S. exploration and production companies are overwhelming storage facilities, which are now essentially at capacity.
At the risk of invoking cliché, this was the perfect storm. COVID-19 stay-at-home precautions severely curtailed economic activity and crude oil consumption.  Automobile commutes and air travel plunged as workers started telecommuting, and events, conferences and vacations were canceled or postponed.
The result has been  global oil demand falling by as much as 20 million barrels per day,  a 20 percent drop in worldwide usage. Meanwhile, rising global oil production by OPEC countries, Russia and the United States glutted markets. The world is awash in crude oil, with no relief in sight.
The ripple effect will be felt all along the energy industry supply chain, with significant impacts to Texas. Manufacturers that supply the oil and gas industry will suffer, as will retail and service businesses deriving income from oil field workers and support staff. Renewable energy sources will struggle to compete with record low oil and gas prices.
Exploration and production company bankruptcies will skyrocket, particularly among  smaller, independent producers with limited capital reserves. In the meantime, better capitalized firms will pick up assets on the cheap, hunker down and wait for better days.
Prior to COVID-19 restrictions, Texas Comptroller Glenn Hegar expected to see an increase in the Economic Stabilization  Fund, known as the rainy day fund. With the collapse of oil prices, a shortfall seems certain, potentially reaching $3 billion for the year. This would pose significant funding challenges for public and higher education, as well as transportation budgets in the  legislative session next year.
Prospective remedies appear limited. The Trump administration may consider tariffs on oil imported to the U.S., a move not likely to find favor with refiners who import heavier crudes from OPEC. Topping off the Strategic Petroleum Reserve with 75 million barrels — about  a day’s worth  of current global consumption — will do little to assuage the situation.
In Texas, the Railroad Commission faces something of a quandary. The last time limits were placed on oil production in Texas was in 1973, so those with any implementation experience are few and far between. Should the commission decide to do this,  the “when” and “how” remain problematic. Will other states do so as well? Will Canada? Would limits on flaring offer a better approach to curbing oil production  by focusing on the long-term conservation of natural gas, while simultaneously benefiting the environment?
Regulating the production of crude oil, known as proration, has always been controversial. In the 1930s, East Texas produced so much oil that prices fell to 10 cents per barrel. The governor, Legislature, federal government and the courts all tussled with the issue, trying to stabilize prices. Ultimately, growing market demand probably did more to resolve the situation than anything else — as will likely be the case this time around as well.
It’s not the end of the world — futures markets for crude prices later this year remain above $30 per barrel. Increased economic activity will revive demand, though not necessarily at previous levels. Long-term behavior has almost certainly been altered. Increased reliance on home delivery of all manner of products will give a boost to providers of such services. Automation of processes and transactions previously requiring people will become more common. Sporting events, movie theaters and festivals may see a falloff in attendance for years to come.
With regard to oil and gas markets, it’s simply a case of too many sellers and not enough buyers. Where crude oil prices go in the future is anyone’s guess, but the near-term trend does not offer much encouragement. The clamor grows in many quarters for a reopening of the economy to greater or lesser degrees. As this occurs, the prospective impact of a second wave of COVID-19 looms large, with the potential to roll back progress that’s been made containing the virus.
As has been the case during periodic epochs of human history, the world once again undertakes a massive, uncontrolled natural experiment. How events play out going forward is anyone’s guess, no doubt with more surprises still  to come.
Tom Tunstall is director of research for the Institute for Economic Development at the University of Texas at San Antonio.
