Could Your IoT System Suffer From Ripple Effects?
Newly discovered vulnerabilities could potentially open the door to bad actors.
As if dealing with the repercussions of COVID-19  was not already enough, researchers recently discovered Ripple20, a set of 19  vulnerabilities found on the Treck TCP/IP stack. Not all  of these vulnerabilities will cause damage. However, four are rated critical with the power to negatively impact industrial devices, power  grids, home devices, retail devices, transportation, networking devices,  enterprise devices and medical devices for years to come.
According  to a recent Cisco blog by Fabien Maisl, “the  vulnerabilities are similar to the Urgent/11 vulnerabilities published  in 2019 and impacting the TCP/IP stack developed by Interpeak. Like Urgent/11,  the Ripple20 vulnerabilities allow attackers to trigger remote code execution  and denial of service (DoS). Many vendors such as HP, Schneider Electric,  Intel, Rockwell Automation, Caterpillar, Baxter and others have already  confirmed being impacted by Ripple20.”
Cisco  points to CVE-2020-11901 as the most severe vulnerability. “It can be  triggered by answering a DNS request from the device and may result in remote  code execution,” writes Maisl. “Because DNS requests generally leave the  network, they can be easily intercepted to give an attacker a way in.  Furthermore, the packet sent to exploit this vulnerability will be compliant  with various RFCs, making it difficult for a firewall to detect the attack.”
While the lack of public-facing IoT devices may provide manufacturers  with a sense of security, SecureLink CISO Tony Howlett suggests that most organizations  are still at risk.  “Ripple20 is especially dangerous because it  affects millions of devices based in the Treck IP stack — including  devices from Cisco, Intel, and Samsung. It is made up of 19 individual  vulnerabilities  and is rated 9.0 on the 10.0 CVSS scale — this alone should spark  a cursory review,” he says. “Remote considerations and having to manage and protect against employee’s at home IoT devices as well as the inability  to patch IoT devices across large, multi-location enterprises asre also key concerns.”
Howlett tells IndustryWeek, manufacturers need  to perform a risk analysis on “infrastructure against the affected companies  and devices. The list isn’t complete and continues to expand almost daily. Use vulnerability scanners with  released signature plug-ins (such as Qualys and Tenable to scan your network  for affected devices,” he says.
Network segmentation, firewalls, router ACLs  to protect affected devices can also play pivotal roles. “You should be doing  this anyway for IoT networks that don't need internet access. Also, make sure  none of your IPs are visible on OSTint databases like Shodan. This open source  site/tool shows exposed IoT devices all over the internet. It will be a piece  of cake and has probably already been done to scan this database for affected  devices/signatures.”
Not practicing good supply chain  security and management, especially when it comes to software components, could be a  costly mistake, explains Howlett. “There are some code management tools  that will help in this,” he says. “The software industry is going to have  to start treating their supply chain the same way regulated industries do,  where they can track every bolt and screw to who made it and in what batch.”
This site requires you to login or register to post a comment.
No comments have been added yet. Want to start the conversation?
Are You in Position to Avoid Being Held Hostage?
Connected environments create new opportunities for hackers to take control.
The continued addition of  operational technology (OT) into connected networks is playing a key role in  expanding the threat landscape. And unfortunately, today’s sophisticated hackers  see the evolution as an opportunity to deploy new ways to attack manufactures.
Ransomware 2.0 is a prime  example. These advanced, human-operated attacks use APT-style tactics designed  to bypass traditional security controls. These threat actors often do not  encrypt data and demand ransom on the first system they compromise. Instead,  they use it as a foothold into the network to conduct network discovery, probe  Active Directory, move laterally, and identify high-value assets to target.  Only after attackers have found the organization’s essential assets, encrypted  the critical data, or taken control of assets do they send their ransom  demands.
To counter Ransonware 2.0, Attivo  Networks recently announced new capabilities to its Endpoint Detection Net  (EDN) solution to improve file protection by concealing and denying access to  production mapped shares, cloud storage, and selected files or folders. By  hiding this information, the EDN solution limits the malware’s choice to engage  only with the decoy environment and dramatically reduces the risk of a  successful data compromise. Many organizations continue to struggle with the  cost and impact of widespread ransomware attacks but derailing these attacks  early can save organizations from those consequences.
Traditional endpoint  solutions, like Endpoint Protection Platforms (EPP) and Endpoint Detection and  Response (EDR), use signature matching or behavioral anomaly detection to  identify malicious binaries and block the execution of ransomware to stop the  infection. Unfortunately, with human attackers using advanced methods, many of  their techniques can evade these solutions.
“Advanced human-controlled  ransomware can evade endpoint security controls and after initial compromise,  move laterally to cause maximum damage, do data exfiltration and encrypt data,”  said Srikant Vissamsetti, senior vice president of engineering, Attivo  Networks. “This advanced protection by the Attivo EDN solution disrupts  ransomware’s ability to move laterally and prevents unauthorized access to data  by concealing production files, folders, removable disks, network shares, and  cloud storage.”
Carolyn  Crandall, chief deception officer at Attivo, tells IndustryWeek that securing  connected operational technology (OT) devices against external and insider  threats has its unique set of challenges. “It is not always possible to load  security software onto these systems and they may be running on old firmware  that cannot be patched. There may also be situations where they are not allowed  to modify them for safety reasons as it could alter operating behaviors,” says  Crandall. “The logistics of updating OT software can also be problematic as  they are difficult to take offline and often operate 24/7. It should also not  be assumed that every device coming from the factory is safe, there can be  tampering at the factory or during the supply chain. It is always best to have  the ability to efficiently detect the compromise and lateral movement of  attackers within these networks.”
According  to Crandall, when an attacker seeks to gain a foothold onto the network using  an OT device, they will compromise the initial device and then move laterally  across the network seeking out and loading malware onto vulnerable devices,  they may also seek out local admin credentials for use to access and steal the  information they need in order to launch a wide-spread attack.
“Any  connected device can become part of a ransomware attack including OT  technology. An attacker will seek to scan hosts and services for compromising  them and dropping malware onto them. Also, ransomware attacks like Robinhood  and Maze will also seek to exploit common local admin credentials that exist on  an endpoint,” she says. “With the new enhancements from the Attivo Endpoint Detection Net,  the odds get turned in the favor of the defender. Organizations can choose to  hide and deny access to their production data so that the attacker can only see  decoys.”
Manufacturers  can also augment this with deception credentials that lead them to decoys, explains  Crandall. “They can also add decoys that appear as the production assets so as  an attacker scans the network for hosts and services to exploit, they are lead  to a high-interaction decoy that will engage with them, slow their attack, and  raise an alert so that they infected system can be isolated from the system,”  she says. “There is no other security control that has this high of an impact  ratio in derailing a ransomware attack and efficiently detecting an adversaries  activities as they try to swim upstream in their attack.”
This site requires you to login or register to post a comment.
No comments have been added yet. Want to start the conversation?
