Bitcoin Cash Price Prediction: BCH/USD fails to break free from the range, reverses gains
Bitcoin Cash (BCH) is the fifth largest digital asset with the current market value of $4.1 billion and an average daily trading volume of $1.11 billion. The coin hit the intraday high at $225.62 during early Asian hours and retreated to $223.16 by the time of writing. BCH lost over 1% in a matter of minutes as a failure to settle above the local resistance triggered stop orders.
IOTA hit the recent high at $0.2272 on Tuesday and retreated to $0.2246 by the time of writing. Despite the retreat, IOTA has gained over 5% on a day-to-day basis. IOTA is currently the 24th largest digital asset with the current market value of $622 million and an average daily trading volume of $15 million. The coin is most actively traded on OKEx against USDT.
XRP/USD attempted a recovery to $0.1800 on Tuesday only to retreat to $0.1750 by the time of writing. The coin  has stayed mostly unchanged both on a day-to-day basis and since the beginning of Wednesday, moving in a tight channel with the short-term bullish bias amid expanding volatility. Ripple's XRP is the fourth largest digital asset with the current market value of $7.79 billion and an average daily trading volume of $1 billion. XRP/USD has lost over 15% in June and over 50% since this time in 2019.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
