Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
Messari has suggested the ripple (XRP) holdings of Ripple co­founder Jed McCaleb and of RippleWorks, a California foundation associated with the distributed ledger technology company Ripple, should be removed from major indices such as Bloomberg­Galaxy, MVIS CryptoCompare, and the Bitwise 10 Large Cap Crypto Index, as well as passive funds such as Grayscale’s Digital Large Cap, and Bitwise’s 10 Private Index Fund.
According to Messari, Ripple co­founders Arthur Britto and Chris Larsen "could have similar selling restrictions on their multi­billion dollar XRP allocations," though it has not included these in its analysis.
"Combined, [these holdings] means 19.2 billion of the 41.0 billion XRP currently quoted as “in circulation” may be illiquid or subject to significant selling restrictions," the report authors wrote.
"In reality, this estimate may prove to be conservative, as they belie XRP trading volumes which have consistently fallen well below that of EOS and litecoin, two crypto-assets whose current referenced market caps are a mere 17% and 15% of XRP’s, respectively. In addition, we believe the actual amount of 'restricted' XRP in distributions to investors, banking partners, and team member may be significantly higher than our initial estimates reflect."
A Ripple spokesperson said: "Not only does this report contain several inaccurate assumptions around lockups and selling restrictions, the entire report is based on an incorrect calculation of market cap. While decentralized digital assets like XRP are different from traditional equities, the term 'market cap' is always a very simple calculation: current price X total number of the asset = market capitalization. That puts XRP's current market cap at approximately $31 billion . We believe that any other calculation of market capitalization for XRP is not a clear representation of the truth."
Ripple rallied last year on reports it had teamed up with some of the world's biggest banks, but has... [+] since fallen back.
Messari also reported "there could be significant, persistent sell­side pressure in the XRP market depending on the length and structure of selling restrictions placed on Ripple’s market-making partners, a Ripple affiliated foundation, and Ripple’s co­founders, all of which appear to have negotiated rate limits for sales based on exchange trading volume of XRP."
According to Messari, Ripple has not shared the methodology or reference exchange data it uses to calculate trading volume for XRP, which it says is a "critical data point that drives selling restrictions."
Messari found more than 99% of XRP trading volume appears to come from overseas exchanges, which it suggests could be suspected of so-called wash trading, a form of market manipulation in which an investor simultaneously sells and buys the same financial instruments to create misleading, artificial activity in the marketplace.
A comparison of Messari's circulating supply estimates compared to Ripple’s highlights the "drastic... [+] difference between our deep dive and the company’s proposed statistics."
Earlier today Ripple reported that average daily XRP volume was $585.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2018.
The ripple price surged over a few months in 2018 as banks around the world announced they were experimenting with Ripple technology to speed up and save money on international payments.
XRP is however down more than 80% from its peak as most major cryptocurrencies readjust following 2017's massive bull run. The ripple price surged to more than $3 in January last year, up from just $0.006 at the start of 2017.
The ripple price is now trading at a little over $0.30, according to the latest prices from CoinDesk's tracker.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
