See: Long-term investors still shouldn’t buy the dip, says El-Erian, but opportunities abound for pro traders
“More so than the health effects, investors are watching for how long the supply chain and corporate earnings will be affected. Will it just be one quarter or even two quarters? You don’t know, and that causes uncertainty,” Saluzzi said.
The global death toll from COVID-19 stands at more than 3,000 , while health officials in Washington state on Monday said there have been four more deaths from the outbreak, bringing the total to six.
The Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development on Monday forecast that the global economy would grow by 2.4% in its “best case scenario,” compared with 2.9% expansion projected before the viral outbreak. The OECD urged governments to act “swiftly and forcefully” to boost the world economy. Finance ministers from the Group of Seven economies were scheduled to hold a call Tuesday to discuss potential responses to the virus, according to news reports.
“It’s both the prospect of fiscal and monetary easing driving markets higher. There is willingness on the part of the Fed and other central banks in the world to lower rates. On the fiscal side, that’s up to governments, but that can be done as well,” Randy Frederick, vice president of trading and derivatives for the Schwab Center for Financial Research, told MarketWatch.
economists wrote Sunday that they expect the Fed to cut interest rates by 50 basis points soon , perhaps even before their next scheduled meeting March 17-18. That move would be followed by another 50-basis-point cut in the second quarter, they said, and would be part of a coordinated effort by the world’s central banks to ease policy.
European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde, in a statement issued after U.S. market closed, said the bank was monitoring the outbreak and stood ready to take “appropriate” steps if needed. Earlier, Bank of Japan Gov. Haruhiko Kuroda said the central bank would take steps to steady markets, and bolster liquidity through short-term lending operations and asset purchases. On Friday, Fed Chairman Jerome Powell issued a rare, unscheduled statement, emphasizing the central bank’s intention to act appropriately to address the risks posed by the coronavirus.
The global economic impacts of the outbreak are already being seen. On Saturday, official data showed China’s factory and nonfactory activity sank to record lows in February as China’s economy struggled to resume normal production following shutdowns due to the outbreak. That raised fears of a global ripple effect.
In U.S. data, the Institute for Supply Management said its manufacturing index dipped to 50.1% last month from 50.9%. Producers reported supply bottlenecks linked to the coronavirus, which has hampered their ability to get parts. Any reading below 50% indicates deteriorating conditions.
