Trump may suspend student loan payments during coronavirus outbreak, treasury secretary says
President Trump may temporarily suspend student loan payments as part of his administration’s efforts to mitigate the economic impact of the coronavirus, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said Friday.
Mnuchin said economic advisers to the president are presenting Trump with a list of about 50 measures he can take to stem the growing fallout from the outbreak, including a cessation of student debt payments for a brief period of time.
“That’s on our list of 50 different items we are bringing to the president for a decision. That is something we are looking at,” Mnuchin told CNBC . “I can assure you the president is all about action, action, action.”
The Treasury Department did not immediately return requests for clarification about how the program would work. The Education Department could suspend federal student loan payments and accruing interest, using the same authority Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass) said she would employ to cancel education debt.
“We’re working with our interagency partners on the best approach to the student loan portfolio during this time,” Angela Morabito, a spokeswoman for the Education Department, said in an email.
Many federal student loan programs already permit deferment or forbearance on loans under certain circumstances, but doing so typically results in increased balances as interest accumulates. About 44 million Americans have student loan debt, and if they are laid off or see their hours cut due to the coronavirus outbreak, they may be forced to increase their overall student loan burdens. They may also try to meet their payments to avoid a penalty, but as a result, reduce spending on other necessities.
Some Democrats have called for a cessation of loan payments. The administration has already said it is considering low- or zero-interest loans for industries such as hospitality and travel that have been hit hard by the coronavirus-related downturn.
The idea would probably be supported by congressional Democrats. Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-N.Y.) on Twitter floated suspending student debt payments during the coronavirus outbreak. She and other liberal lawmakers such as Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) have called for outright canceling the entire $1.6 trillion student loan burden in America.
“Plenty of industries affected by the coronavirus are in Washington asking for a bailout, but student debtors have to keep making payments even if their hours are cut,” said Marshall Steinbaum, assistant professor of economics at the University of Utah and an expert in student debt. “In the 2008-2009 financial crisis, we bailed out the banks but not households. … Let’s not do that again.”
The Trump administration will have to wrestle with whether to set a precedent that could increase pressure to take bolder steps to help Americans burdened with student loans. Suspending loan payments, however, could prove useful in the president’s bid for reelection. Last year, Trump demanded aides present a plan to tackle student debt and the rising cost of college education, worrying that he has nothing that could compete with the expansive plans from Democrats vying for the office.
Analyst forecasts more pain for U.S. stock markets
Stocks are rebounding. Does that mean we hit a bottom? Not so fast.
“We’re two-thirds there,” David Rosenberg of Rosenberg Research said in an email Friday. “The first one-third was getting rid of the froth. The last one-third was pricing in much of the recession. The next one-third will complete the process of moving from denial to acceptance that we are, in fact, in a recession.” Dan Niles of AlphaOne Capital Partners, a San Francisco hedge fund, sees more pain.
“My base case is we are in a recession and over the long term the [Standard & Poor’s 500] will fall 35 to 50 percent from its peak on Feb. 19,” Niles said.
The S&P 500 is down 26.74 percent from its February all-time high, according to S&P Dow Jones Indices. That means we may only be halfway through the misery to a bottom, according to Niles’s worst case. “I don’t know when the market will bottom — it is likely that we will need to see new cases peak before that occurs,” said Brent Schutte, chief investment strategist, Northwestern Mutual Wealth Management Company, in an email.
Asian markets were all over the place Friday, not evincing much comfort from what appears to be slowing virus expansion. It was a dark day for Japan’s Nikkei 225, which followed Wall Street into a bear market Thursday. The Nikkei sank another 6.08 percent going into the weekend.
South Korea’s Kospi tumbled more than 3.4 percent, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng pulled back 1.5 percent. The tech-heavy Shanghai Composite finished the week down more than 1 percent. China has reopened the last of 42 Apple stores that had closed during last month’s massive shutdown.
On the other hand, Australian stocks rebounded sharply Friday to close up more than 4 percent after being down as much as 8 percent earlier in the day. That wasn’t enough to lift them out of a bear market, which it entered this week.
European markets rebounded Thursday after one of their worst days in history, boosted by intervention plans from the European Central Bank. The benchmark Stoxx 600 index was up nearly 8 percent in midday trading. Germany’s DAX also jumped nearly 8 percent, while Britain’s FTSE 100 and France’s CAC 40 climbed 8.3 percent.
Exchanges in Europe saw double-digit declines Thursday after traders were blindsided by President Trump’s European travel ban. ECB President Christine LaGarde also sparked a sell-off in Italian government bonds with an offhand remark Thursday that the ECB was not worried about rising funding costs for some euro-zone governments. She later modified her comments in an interview with CNBC.
“The VIX volatility index suggests markets are as jittery as they have been at any time since the financial crisis,” Russ Mould, investment director at AJ Bell, wrote in commentary Friday. “Stimulus from the Australian authorities and the U.S. Federal Reserve’s $5 trillion cash injection are further signs that central banks are ready to do everything they can to restore calm. Regulators are also intervening with the UK’s financial regulator banning investors from shorting certain European stocks."
Hackers are seizing on coronavirus fears to steal data, researchers warn
Chinese hackers have used fake documents about the coronavirus to deliver malicious software and steal sensitive user information, according to a report this week from researchers documenting a growing wave of cybercrime exploiting fears about the pandemic.
As the novel coronavirus has spread, cybercriminals and spies have taken advantage of the growing demand for information by loading malicious software into tracking maps, government reports and health fact sheets in numerous languages. New websites with variations on “coronavirus” in their Internet addresses also have exploded, with many of them masking online scams.
Among the most sophisticated efforts is being led by a group of Chinese hackers, dubbed Vicious Panda by cybersecurity researchers at Check Point, an Israeli-based technology company. Vicious Panda used a fake document, purportedly disclosing coronavirus infection information from the Mongolian Health Ministry, to lure Internet users into sharing sensitive personal information, with the goal of gaining access to computers and smartphones, according to the Check Point report.
The disease “is presenting not only a physical threat but a cyber threat as well,” Lotem Finkelsteen, Check Point’s head of threat intelligence, said in a news release Thursday.
The Washington Post is providing some coronavirus coverage free, including:
