Ethereum closed the previous 4 hours up 0.07% ($0.15); this denotes the 2nd candle in a row an upward move has occurred. Ethereum outperformed all 5 assets in the Top Cryptos asset class since the previous 4 hours.
Ethereum came into today down 0.59% ($1.34) from the open of the previous day, marking the 2nd day in a row a decrease has occurred. This move happened on lower volume, as yesterday’s volume was down 42.26% from the day before — and down 37.26% from the same day the week before. Those trading within the Top Cryptos asset class should know that Ethereum was the worst performer in the class during the previous day. The daily price chart of Ethereum below illustrates.
First things first: Ethereum crossed below its 50 day moving average yesterday. The clearest trend exists on the 90 day timeframe, which shows price moving up over that time. Interestingly, a trend in the other direction exists on the 30 day timeframe, where price is headed down. If you’re looking to trade the primary trend, this may be a good opportunity to buy dips created by the counter trend. For another vantage point, consider that Ethereum’s price has gone down 18 of the previous 30 trading days.
Gonna say this right nowThe Ethereum community has to prepare itself for one or many of these “defi” products to blow upWith significant funds involved, it will wreak havoc on the Ethereum value for everyone (unfortunately IMO)We have to build defences for this right now.
@Crypt0_kenny VET and XRP have similar supply, and i can easily see it do the same run up. So $3-5 is my next bull run target. But who knows, with institutions taking over Crypto and Vechain expanding use cases into the space of Ethereum and other top projects, it could go much higher..
In terms of news links for Ethereum here’s one to try:
Thanks to father’s influence, Vitalik got to know bitcoin as a high school kid and started researching on the project….At first, his did not believe in Bitcoin….After the global study tour, Vitalik started to think about launching something of his own by creating a universal cryptocurrency, a platform where everyone can create any application and was named as Ethereum.
