If the class action against Ripple Labs proceeds, it would not only threaten to eliminate XRP’s utility as a currency, but it would upend and threaten to destroy "the $500 billion XRP market,” according to the financial tech company’s motion to dismiss.
By Alaina Lancaster | January 15, 2020 at 05:59 PM
Your article was successfully shared with the contacts you provided.
U.S. District Chief Judge Phyllis Hamilton, Northern District of California (Photo: Jason Doiy/ALM)
A federal judge’s interpretation of the hazy definitions of securities and public offerings in the cryptocurrency world could determine whether an investor class action proceeds against financial tech company Ripple Labs.
Become a Free ALM Digital Reader.
Benefits of a Digital Membership:
Alaina Lancaster, based in San Francisco, covers disruptive trends and technologies shaping the future of law. She authors the weekly legal futurist newsletter What's Next . Contact her at alancaster@alm.com . On Twitter: @a_lancaster3
Ten California businesses, including two law firms, filed class actions alleging major banks such as Wells Fargo and Bank of America prioritized larger loan applicants as part of the federal $349 billion Paycheck Protection Program.
“This is new terrain in this litigation, so that is also something to take into account,” said U.S. District Judge Richard Seeborg of the Northern District of California in granting preliminary approval to the proposed deal to settle claims brought on behalf of investors who alleged that the initial coin offering on the Tezos blockchain violated U.S. securities laws.
An election year, with no knowledge of which party will next get to choose judicial nominees, might be the best time to create new judgeships “because nobody knows the outcome and we all know we need more judges,” said Sen. Lindsey Graham during a hearing on a Judicial Conference request for more judges that suggests five new seats on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
Law Offices of Mark E. Salomone
With this subscription you will receive unlimited access to high quality, online, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry. This is perfect for attorneys licensed in multiple jurisdictions or for attorneys that have fulfilled their CLE requirement but need to access resourceful information for their practice areas.
Our Team Account subscription service is for legal teams of four or more attorneys. Each attorney is granted unlimited access to high quality, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry along with administrative access to easily manage CLE for the entire team.
Gain access to some of the most knowledgeable and experienced attorneys with our 2 bundle options! Our Compliance bundles are curated by CLE Counselors and include current legal topics and challenges within the industry. Our second option allows you to build your bundle and strategically select the content that pertains to your needs. Both options are priced the same.
Dynamically explore and compare data on law firms, companies, individual lawyers, and industry trends.
Legal Compass includes access to our exclusive industry reports, combining the unmatched expertise of our analyst team with ALM’s deep bench of proprietary information to provide insights that can’t be found anywhere else.
Legal Compass delivers you the full scope of information, from the rankings of the Am Law 200 and NLJ 500 to intricate details and comparisons of firms’ financials, staffing, clients, news and events.
Annual conference bringing together the leaders of independent law firms from around the world, from 40+ jurisdictions.
ACE Leadership Forum & Expo is the annual conference for Senior Claims Executives in Insurance organizations.
Consulting magazine is proud to recognize this unique group of movers & shakers at our annual Rising Stars of Profession awards.
Webcast Date:  July 29, 2020 | Join this webcast for best practices and lessons learned for investigations.
Webcast Date: Wednesday, July 22, 2020 | According to a recent Gallup study, 62% of U.S. employees worked from home this past April, reflecting a global migration to remote environments as the COVID-19 pandemic spread.
Webcast Date: Wednesday, July 22, 2020 | Privacy remains one of the top issues for in-house counsel and law firms, and those issues underscoring the need for data privacy have become even more pronounced with the onset of the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Premier investment fund seeks 3+ year attorney for high impact role advising on wide range of matters surrounding fund s investment process,...
Terrific southern New Hampshire law firm seeks 3+ year associate with entrepreneurial spirit and family law experience to join diverse pract...
Full service law firm conveniently located on Route 23 in Wayne seeks solo or small practice to join our collegial office with comfortable a...
