Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
"We must take the blockchain as an important breakthrough for independent innovation of core technologies," Xi reportedly said, speaking at the 18th collective study of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee in Beijing.
"[We must] clarify the main direction, increase investment, focus on a number of key core technologies, and accelerate the development of blockchain technology and industrial innovation."
However, Xi's comments, which referred only to blockchain technology and not to bitcoin and cryptocurrencies, might not have been the driver behind bitcoin's recovery.
Following bitcoin's sudden drop earlier this week, bitcoin and crypto investors feared the worst wasn't over the for the market.
The bitcoin price has suddenly surged after a sell-off earlier this week, leaving many bitcoin and ... [+] crypto traders scratching their heads.
Facebook's chief executive Mark Zuckerberg was savaged by U.S. senators over his plans for a bitcoin rival dubbed libra and crypto investors are fretting there could be a global crackdown on bitcoin and other digital tokens .
Elsewhere, technical data pointed to a so-called "death cross" for bitcoin, while the Fear & Greed Index slumped and a Twitter reading of investor temperature was poor.
"Sentiment in the crypto market is very low right now," eToro senior market analyst Mati Greenspan wrote in a note to clients before the pump earlier today.
This sentiment slump meant investors bet against the bitcoin price, predicting it would move lower.
When the bitcoin price recovered a couple of hundred dollars per bitcoin in just a few minutes, some $150 million worth of short positions on the Seychelles-based BitMEX crypto exchange were liquidated, according to bitcoin and cryptocurrency analytics provider Skew .
This triggered what's known as a "short squeeze," where an asset rapidly increases in value due to short sellers trying to cover their positions, resulting in buying volume that drives the price up.
"Sentiment can change pretty quickly in this market, especially while volumes are low," Greenspan added in his earlier note.
A small uptick in the bitcoin price led to millions of dollars of bitcoin short positions being ... [+] liquidated.
Bitcoin volumes have been struggling recently , leaving the market especially vulnerable to so-called whales placing large orders or liquidating short positions.
Bitcoin trading volume among the top ten biggest bitcoin and crypto exchanges has fallen to under $200 million a day, according to bitcoin and crypto data company Messari, down 20-fold from a peak of $4 billion per day just a few months ago.
Adding to the market turnaround, bitcoin futures exchange Bakkt recorded a new all-time high in daily trading volume with 1156 futures contracts traded today.
It was Bakkt's lacklustre volumes that many believe triggered bitcoin's fall from its $10,000 plateau late last month.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
