XRP's performance has remained relatively poor when compared to others in the top 10 cryptos list.
Meanwhile, the coin was strongly outperformed by FTX Token, which is joining the bullish trend, unlike XRP.
As for Enjin Coin, its recent performance was also quite poor, with the coin not showing enough strength.
Since the start of the second quarter of this year, the situation in the crypto space saw major changes. While numerous coins began to surge, some did not perform nearly as well as others.
In the last 24 hours alone, FTX token, for
example, demonstrated a strong positive trend. It easily joined the new bull
turning around and dropping again.
April 2nd. The coin’s behavior indicated a pending period of correction.
billion. Meanwhile, its market cap still sits below $8 billion.
is a bearish pressure in the market. While XRP is seeing gains, this might
simply be a short recovery before the bearish trend returns. There is also a
noticeable increase in selling pressure.
How does FTX Token compare?
The situation is completely different when it comes to FTX Token (FTT) , however. The token, currently sitting at 33rd spot on the list of largest coins by market cap, outshined XRP quite strongly. Its price hiked from $2.31 on April 1st to $2.57 on April 2nd, After that, it saw a mild correction to $2,46 yesterday evening. But, it quickly returned to its surge. forcing it throughout the night. It once again broke its resistance at $2.50, currently sitting at $2.54, after a 3.27% growth.
at the time of writing, while its volume is at $3.24 million. Its Parabolic SAR
indicates that a bullish period is coming, as the money is flowing into the
last day. It only recently managed to slightly enter the green. Its price
days. However, not a single attempt was successful.
The coin currently has a price of $0.093, with
a growth rate of 0.51% in the last 24 hours. The coin is once again approaching
its resistance, although with no real strength behind it. Its market cap sits
million. The coin currently ranks as the 58th largest cryptocurrency. According
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
