Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
Coil’s technology notes when a user visits a Coil-enabled site and apportions a payment to that site, paid out in cash or crypto currency — specifically in XRP.
That this could be the biggest use of XRP outside of the global payments company Ripple is no coincidence. Coil’s founder and CEO, Stefan Thomas, was Ripple’s chief technology officer until mid-2018  — Ripple being the biggest user of XRP to this point. Coil was backed by Ripple in 2018, which participated in a reported $4 million dollar seed round and then, in September 2019, tossed in a massive investment of one billion XRP tokens (and to be clear, I’m hopelessly conflicted reporting this story as I once worked at Ripple. To be equally clear, as of this writing I don’t own any XRP.)
To facilitate paying website owners, Coil is also announcing a new crypto wallet partnership with San Francisco-based Uphold, which boasts of trading in sixty currencies and having deals with banks in thirty-five countries
“Publishers and individual creators are seeking new revenue streams,” Thomas said in a release. “At the same time, consumers are suffering from site-by-site subscription fatigue and the invasive privacy issues associated with ads. With the introduction of the Web Monetization plugin and more payout options for publishers and creators around the globe, our goal is to provide more choice and less friction for everyone.”
That might be the goal, but one more payment option is surely more friction, at least at the start. And to be sure, this isn’t a deal with every site using WordPress. Indeed, it doesn’t appear to be a deal with any site using WordPress. This is more of a hunting licence, allowing Coil to try to convince content creators to hitch their wagon to Coil, if not XRP.
“I’m all for writers getting paid,” says Lou Kerner, longtime analyst and founder of Crypto Mondays. “Is this a good use case for blockchain? Sure. The problem is the revenues generated from this are de minimis. Not many people, at the end of the day, care about privacy. Facebook and Google remain the winners.”
Thomas is obviously taking the opposing bet: that users will pay for privacy and, should the company ever get traction across multiple paywalls, pay for the convenience of signing up for a single subscription to multiple sites.
And from a wider view, if Coil succeeds it would signal the success of blockchain itself. The conversation about blockchain is almost always about the trading of an asset, the movement of a price, a squiggly line going up or down: “the roller coaster ride” in cable TV parlance. That conversation is rarely about the use of decentralized networks.
But Ripple has begun to crack the ice in the world of global payments. As has Chronicled in life science. As has Braintrust in freelance technology talent. Coil’s new WordPress deal could prove to be a big step advancing the cause of functional blockchain.
“Blockchain is still like the days of getting around the internet without a browser,” says Kerner. “You could do it, but not many people did. The on-ramps and off-ramps for blockchain are still to hard. Maybe Coil will help change that.”
My peripatetic career has seen me in prominent roles as a technology journalist, broadcaster, hedge fund portfolio manager, short seller and growth investor. I am
My peripatetic career has seen me in prominent roles as a technology journalist, broadcaster, hedge fund portfolio manager, short seller and growth investor. I am currently an advisor to a handful of technology and biotechnology companies, including Braintrust, the first user-controlled talent network.
Fundamentally I'm an entrepreneur -- helping to start media companies such as the Industry Standard, Slam, TheStreet.com and Vibe. I was CNBC’s first Silicon Valley reporter, later helped create the TV show Bloomberg West for Bloomberg TV and hosted the radio show and podcast Bloomberg Advantage. I also served as the Chief Market Strategist for the global payments blockchain company Ripple.
