German Factory Orders rebounded 10.4% MoM in May.
On a yearly basis, Germany’s Factory Orders slumped 29.3% in May.
EUR/USD shrugs off downbeat German Factory data.
The German Factory Orders jumped sharply in May, suggesting that the manufacturing contraction in Europe’s largest economy is slowing down.
Contracts for goods ‘Made in Germany’ arrived at +10.4% on the month vs. +15.0% expected and -25.8% last, the latest data published by the Federal Statistics Office showed on Monday.
On an annualized basis, Germany’s Industrial Orders plunged by 29.3% in the reported month vs. -36.6% previous and -28.0% expectations.
The Factory orders released by the Deutsche Bundesbank is an indicator that includes shipments, inventories, and new and unfilled orders. An increase in the factory order total may indicate an expansion in the German economy and could be an inflationary factor. It is worth noting that the German Factory barely influences, either positively or negatively, the total Eurozone GDP . A high reading is positive (or bullish) for the EUR, while a low reading is negative.
The shared currency showed little reaction to the downbeat German Factory Orders data, as EUR/USD keeps its range near daily highs of 1.1294.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
