The starting point in the chart above is the issuance of many billions of XRP tokens – essentially printing Monopoly money out of thin air, except that you can play Monopoly with Monopoly money.
To obscure Ripple’s founders’ intentions, however, an open source ‘community’ – not technically Ripple itself – issued the tokens. “XRP is open source and it was not created by our company, so that existed as an open source technology,” explains Ryan Zagone, director of regulatory relations for Ripple. “We didn’t create XRP.”
How, then, did Ripple end up with its massive stake in XRP, amounting to well over half the available tokens? “What we do have is we do own a significant amount of XRP, it was gifted to us by some of the open-source developers that created it,” Zagone continues. “But there’s not a direct connection between Ripple the company and XRP.”
However, Zagone is being disingenuous at best, as Ripple gets a say as to who can process XRP transactions, essentially making XRP a centralized, permissioned crypto. As a result, many people in the crypto community don’t even consider XRP to be a cryptocurrency at all, because it’s not decentralized.
One of the strongest indicators that Ripple is a going concern is the dozens of customers it touts. Look more closely, however, and most such companies are ‘partners,’ not customers – and to make matters worse, Ripple pays companies to become partners.
Ripple calls this arrangement the RippleNet Accelerator Program. “Starting [October 13, 2017], Ripple will offer a unique reward for financial institutions that are the first in their markets to process and promote commercial payments on RippleNet,” according to a Ripple blog post. “The reward will come in the form of rebates through the new RippleNet Accelerator Program.”
Where, then, does the money for these rewards come from? “The RippleNet Accelerator Program is funded by $300 million of XRP from Ripple’s XRP holdings,” the post continues.
In other words, Ripple is using its share of its free XRP tokens to build the illusion it has paying customers – when in fact Ripple is paying them, not the other way around.
Ripple’s stated goal of this incentive program is to lower what it calls ‘liquidity cost.’ “Since we’re offering the incentives in XRP, we anticipate seeing an added benefit of building an easy on-ramp for institutions to use XRP in their payment flows to lower liquidity cost in the future,” says Monica Long, SVP of marketing at Ripple. “Early reception of these XRP incentives in a test phase has been very positive.”
The question of liquidity cost, in fact, is at the heart of Ripple’s international payments product strategy. For XRP to work as an intermediate currency, banks or other institutions must maintain sufficient reserves of XRP in order to respond to requests for transactions.
However, there are two massive problems with this approach. First, XRP is simply too volatile. “You need someone to provide the liquidity to be able to change into and out of Ripple,” explains Martin Walker, director for banking and finance at the Center for Evidence-Based Management. “And holding Ripple, a currency which has seen its price drop 80 percent and then back up 100 percent in the course of the last two months is just not credible.”
Second, maintaining liquidity in XRP doesn’t solve the core problem with money transfers from countries with more stable currencies to those with less stable ones, as such transfers generally go only one way. For example, for a financial services firm to handle payments from the US to Guatemala, it would need to have liquidity in Guatemalan Quetzals in order to disburse payments. Liquidity in XRP would be useless.
As with many cryptotokens, shady operators seek to circumvent regulatory controls by classifying their tokens as not being securities. Ripple takes this approach as well. “XRP is not a security for three reasons: if Ripple, the company, shuts down tomorrow, the XRP ledger will continue to operate; it’s an open-source, decentralized technology,” explains Brad Garlinghouse CEO of Ripple. “if you buy XRP, [you are] not buying shares of Ripple – buying XRP doesn’t give you ownership of Ripple.”
Garlinghouse, however, is confusing ‘equity’ with ‘security,’ and then obscuring his argument with the ‘Ripple doesn’t control XRP’ canard.
The SEC (or other relevant national regulatory body) is the final arbiter of what constitutes a security, but the commonsense way to understand a security is this: if people buy an asset with the expectation of selling it later for a profit, then it’s a security.
XRP clearly qualifies by this informal definition – and in fact, Ripple’s holders of XRP are counting on this fact to pump up its value. JPMorgan’s JPM Coin, in contrast, isn’t tradable, and thus would never be classified as a security.
Does Ripple’s Technology Even Work?
Paying early partners to try out technology isn’t in and of itself dishonest – after all,
did something similar. However, while PayPal built a working payments infrastructure, it’s not clear that Ripple’s technology is a viable alternative to traditional payment mechanisms like Swift, or whether it can deliver on its promises at all.
