The cryptocurrency exchange’s subsidiary has secured a UK MTF license, and can reach new customers in Europe thanks to the official stamp of approval.
Kraken Futures (aka Crypto Facilities) has obtained an MTF license in the UK.
The license lets Kraken Futures reach customers who must trade on regulated platforms.
Kraken Futures is the first cryptocurrency firm to obtain such a license.
A catch-all term for tokens used by networks as either a store of value, resources or information.
exchange, has obtained the first-ever Multilateral Trading Facility (MTF) license in the United Kingdom for a cryptocurrency firm.
According to a release, the license—awarded by the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA)—will allow Kraken Futures to reach customers who are legally required to trade on regulated platforms, and allow the company to expand its product offerings.
The licensed acquisition also makes Kraken Futures the only licensed derivatives marketplace in Europe that can offer leveraged cryptocurrency trading. These futures contracts let traders gain exposure to crypto
without actually holding any tokens.
Bitcoin is a form of digital currency, created by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008.
A blockchain project conceived by Vitalik Buterin that allows developers to build decentralized apps (dapps) using Smart Contracts.
“We undergo these licensing efforts because Kraken is about making crypto accessible for everyone,” said Kraken CEO and co-founder Jesse Powell, in a release . “This particular license means that a sophisticated class of investors, limited by their own requirements to interface with a regulated venue such as an MTF, will now have access to crypto derivatives in Europe for the first time. More participants means more liquidity and a better experience for everyone.”
Kraken is Europe’s largest cryptocurrency exchange in terms of euro trading volumes, it claims, offering trading for 30+ digital currencies and seven fiat currencies. The exchange has some 4 million global users.
A June report from Finery Technology found that Kraken offers the best Bitcoin to euro liquidity in Europe, beating rivals such as Binance, Coinbase, and Bitstamp.
The views and opinions expressed by the author are for informational purposes only and do not constitute financial, investment, or other advice.
Get the best of Decrypt where you want it most.
