Tiffany Hayden has completely withdrawn her support from XRP and sold off all her holdings of the crypto asset.
Her decision was based on the constant verbal attacks she has been receiving from members of the XRP community.
The XRP community has also been involved in related hostility issues in the past.
As major cryptocurrencies in the world suffer losses, it
supporter of the digital asset.
A top supporter of the XRP crypto , Tiffany Hayden, has denounced her support and sold off all her XRP assets, citing toxic XRP crypto community as the reason for her decision. She announced on her twitter page yesterday, saying she is no longer supporting XRP and not holding any of the digital tokens.
Hayden also pointed out that the continuous fall in the price of XRP is a problem for the community and the feeble growth of the crypto coin is a major problem facing the community. She said that supporters of XRP keep pouring insults on her for her latest action, and said since she has withdrawn from the community, they should look for someone else to attack.
Hayden revealed recently that the XRP network has been suffering from breaches that could hamper its operations. She said that ever since she made that statement, she has been receiving a series of verbal attacks.
My parents aren’t on Twitter! Try reading my post! Wherever XRP supporters congregate, they have nothing better to do than talk shit about me, which my parents and children have the pleasure of reading.
I’m done. Find somebody else to demonize and spend your life bitching about.
According to her, that’s the reason she had to break all ties with the token and all the support she has rendered to the company.
In a twitter statement, she said “I’m not holding $XRP anymore, XRP supporters, so find something else to talk about,” Although the crypto community is renowned for gathering very passionate groups, the community at Ripple is one of the most toxic. The hostile group who is showing support for Ripple’s cryptocurrency has become more intolerable to Tiffany Hayden, who was one of the earlier supporters.
Apart from her strong voice, she has rendered for XRP over the years, she is also an independent blockchain advisor. But right now, she has completely dissociated herself from Ripple and its cryptocurrency XRP and asked the community to let her be.
community has been hostile to an individual or a group within the community. In
crypto community, had to delete its section from Ripple. According to the platform,
it was severely criticized after it highlighted David Schartz, and the high
level of hostility prompted its decision to withdraw from the community.
This latest development could compound the issues Ripple and its coins XRP are facing at the moment, as the market continues to slide negatively.
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
