Real Estate Investors has been a pretty disappointing investment, even before the Covid-19 catastrophe.
Midas recommended the Midlands-based property firm in 2014 at 52p. At the beginning of the year, it was 55p and last week, it closed at 34p. The business was buffeted by Brexit-related worries in 2016 and the shares have clearly been hit hard in recent weeks, too.
response seems overdone. Real Estate Investors is a highly conservative business, led by Paul Bassi, a veteran of the property market. The company's tenants are deliberately spread across sectors, with NHS offices leading the pack, as well as other government bodies.
There are retailers, restaurants and hotels in the mix, too, but most tenants are responsible for a fraction of the group's total revenues. Reassuringly, Bassi's portfolio is 96 per cent let and when quarterly rents fell due last week, no one defaulted or even suggested that they might. Real Estate's 2019 results, released this month, showed solid progress and a total dividend of 3.8p was proposed.
Once that is paid, shareholders will have received more than 15p worth of dividend payments per share over the past five years, some compensation for the poor share price performance.
Midas verdict: Real Estate tenants may struggle if the effects of coronavirus intensify over the coming months. But the company is financially strong, the Midlands has been forging ahead and long-term prospects are bright. At 34p, this stock is cheap – and it offers a yield of more than 10 per cent.
Will coronavirus sink house prices?
The property market has been frozen as estate agents are instructed not to do viewings and valuations and surveys can’t happen.
Meanwhile, banking giants Barclays and Halifax have axed a big chunk of their mortgage ranges – only offering new deals through brokers to those with the largest deposits – and the industry says it has been overwhelmed with requests for mortgage holidays.
Amidst all this, many are asking the inevitable question: ‘What will happen to house prices?’
On this podcast, Simon Lambert, Lee Boyce and Georgie Frost look at what buyers and sellers can do, how the freeze is affecting those due to move, and explore what could happen next for the property market.
Food retailers have been booming in recent weeks. Shoppers have gone into panic mode: pasta, booze and loo roll have been flying off the shelves and online delivery services are swamped.
The frenzy should bolster revenues across the grocery sector but it will feed through to certain suppliers as well. Hilton Food Group, for instance, unveiled an upbeat trading statement last week, saying 2019 figures were ahead of expectations and the current year has started well. Hilton provides Tesco with all its beef and lamb – roasting joints, steaks, chops and more specialised goods, such as barbecueready burgers or Bolognese sauce.
Having focused on red meat throughout its 26-year history, the company recently expanded into fish, vegetarian and vegan products, in response to changing consumer tastes.
Hilton operates in several countries outside Britain, including Australia and New Zealand and much of Northern Europe. In each place, the group tends to work with one large supermarket group so it can build a relationship with them and become a partner, not just a faceless supplier.
The strategy is clearly delivering results. Chief executive Philip Heffer is optimistic about the future and doing pretty well in the present. Lockdowns across the world mean people are eating more at home and the good weather here is likely to encourage barbecue enthusiasts to light up their grills, particularly as eating out is no longer an option.
Midas verdict: Midas recommended Hilton Food Group back in 2008 when the shares were £1.85 and again in 2013 when the price had risen to £3.05. The stock closed last week at £10.24, compared with more than £11 at the beginning of the year.
Existing investors keen to bank profits may choose to offload a few shares but they should not sell out completely. This is a solid, well-run business and the 2019 dividend, forecast at 22p, looks pretty secure.
Your gene health is making a direct contribution to the fight against coronavirus. Last week, the diagnostics specialist revealed it is helping medical group Novacyt to make Covid-19 testing kits.
The tests produce results within just two hours so hospitals can quickly find out whether suspected sufferers and medical staff have the virus. Demand is racheting up by the day from countries around the world, including the US where the authorities gave the tests emergency authorisation last week.
Tens of millions of tests are expected to be sold over the next few months. Novacyt cannot satisfy all these anxious customers alone so it has turned to just two other businesses to help, one of which is Manchester-based Yourgene.
The decision is a ringing endorsement of Yourgene's facilities and its ability to produce cutting-edge diagnostic materials. The company will be building up production in the next few weeks and may play a larger part in the process over time. Midas recommended Yourgene at the beginning of the year when the stock was 13.75p.
It is one of the few shares to have risen since, to 14.50p, an increase of more than 5 per cent. The group usually focuses on tests for Down's Syndrome, Cystic Fibrosis and male infertility but it is diverting resources to help in the fight against Covid-19.
Midas verdict: Medical companies around the world are working to curb the spread of coronavirus and Yourgene, a small AIM business, is at the heart of these efforts. The business is at a pioneer in the sophisticated medical diagnostics industry and the shares should continue to gain ground.
