In 2007, fiddler Kyle Dillingham and his bandmates in Horseshoe Road played 33 shows in 11 days at the Oklahoma State Fair.
The run was so successful, that they returned to do it again the following year, and Dillingham added a solo fair gig fiddling at one of the horse shows.
"So, I ended up doing 66 shows in 11 days. When the whole thing ended ... my body just collapsed," Dillingham recalled with a laugh.
But those opportunities have been scrapped for 2020. The Oklahoma State Fair's Board of Directors announced Friday that the fair has been canceled due to the coronavirus pandemic.
The Oklahoma State Fair, which was planned for Sept. 17-27, is one of the largest annual events in the state, drawing about 900,000 attendees every year.
Although the state fair has sometimes been modified — particularly during World War II — spokesman Scott Munz said this is the first time in the venerable event's history that it has been completely canceled.
"We say that we've never shut down in our 114-year history because there's always been a fair of some sort contiguous since 1907," Munz said. "The facts made the decision easy; emotions made it very hard to do."
The COVID-19 pandemic this year has canceled all kinds of events, festivals and fairs worldwide. With the number of coronavirus cases rising in Oklahoma, the fair wasn't the only large event to scratch its 2020 edition this week: Linde Oktoberfest Tulsa, which was planned for October and annually draws 60,000 people, also was canceled Friday for the first time in its four-decade history, while the 13th annual Norman Music Festival, which last year featured more than 300 acts and drew an estimated 100,000 attendees, was scrapped Wednesday after initially postponing from April to August.
"We've been talking literally for three months about how to design something that would be palatable, and every time that we come up with an idea we get hit with a spike (in cases) and say, 'Well, maybe that's not gonna work,'" Munz said.
One of the fair's premier attractions, Disney on Ice, announced earlier this month that it was canceling its 2020 engagements at the Oklahoma State Fair and the Tulsa State Fair, which is scheduled for Oct. 1-11. The fair's other arena event, the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association's Xtreme Bulls and Concerts, was still on, but the venue capacity would have to be slashed.
"It makes it very impractical to break even, let alone make any money. ... There's some serious restrictions in place," Munz said. "And then there's the carnival ... How do you wipe down the rides between trips and not cause a backlog that then is going to impact the social distancing ... because the line is going to get so long?"
The Oklahoma State Fair boasts a yearly economic impact of about $100 million.
"It impacts a lot of people on the fair circuit and within the fair industry," Munz said. "There's also a ripple effect out in the community: you look at restaurants that are impacted, you look at hotels that are impacted, you look at gas stations that are impacted because of the influx of people into Oklahoma City."
Along with attendees there for the fun, the event annually attracts thousands of competitors, vendors and exhibitors. Norman-based carver Fernando "Don" Dulnuan Jr. has been setting up his Don's Chainsaw Creations tent at the fair annually since 2018, and he was looking forward to creating more chain saw art at this year's event.
"I was really excited (about it) because all my other shows were canceled, and I was hoping that at least the state fair wasn't canceled," he said. "That's where I get my publicity and, of course, some of my sales. ... I'm trying to stay visible because it helps you get your name out there ... so it hurts financially."
Although he will be the "Rambling Chainsaw Artist" for a while, he plans to be back at the 2021 Oklahoma State Fair.
"As long as they want me there ... I will go, because I am trying to give back to them because they've helped me," he said.
Although Dillingham last performed the state fair in 2018, the fiddler said he knows that this year's cancellation will leave a big hole in the 2020 calendar.
"It's nostalgic, the fair. The fair is a very, very special thing for a lot of people. It holds a lot of those traditions and annual memories. And for me, it goes back to the formation and the early memories of my band," he said.
"I don't know what I would do if I was in their shoes — I guess I'm glad I'm not — because there's a lot of things they have to consider ... and no matter what, you're going to affect somebody's life."
