Motorcycles cruise the parade route in Yadkinville on July 4, 2019.
The Yadkin Cultural Arts Center is represented in the 2019 Yadkinville Fourth of July parade.
The Yadkin Rescue Squad takes part in the 2019 Yadkinville Fourth of July parade.
Lady Liberty and Uncle Sam in the 2019 Yadkinville Fourth of July parade.
Local veterans ride a float in the 2018 Fourth of July parade in Yadkinville.
Festively decorated tractors parade down Main Street, Yadkinville in celebration of the Fourth of July in 2017.
Local veterans lead in the 2017 Fourth of July parade in Yadkinville.
A patriotic float in the 2016 Yadkinville July Fourth Parade.
Children from a Yadkinville church ride on a float in the 2016 July 4 parade.
A flag bedecked tractor makes it way down Main Street in the 2016 Yadkinville July 4 Parade.
A local immigrant and LGBT rights group participates in the 2016 Yadkinville July 4 Parade.
Closing out the 2015 July 4 parade in Yadkinville were several horses with riders dressed in patriotic red, white and blue.
Area churches participate in the 2015 July 4 parade in Yadkinville.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, area residents will not gather to honor the nation’s independence by way of parades or celebratory fireworks. East Bend and Yadkinville events to celebrate the July 4th holiday have been cancelled or postponed.
“The Town of Yadkinville has made a decision to cancel the upcoming annual 4th of July events,” said Yadkinville Mayor Eddie Normal. “The decision to cancel the annual event was difficult to make. Public Safety was at the heart of the decision. The health and safety of our community is something that the Town of Yadkinville takes seriously. The COVID-19 Pandemic has changed the overall landscape of our Town and surrounding communities. Social Distancing as directed by the State of North Carolina would have been impossible to implement and to enforce.”
East Bend’s annual God and Country Celebration, typically held the Saturday prior to July 4 was postponed to Sept. 5, state guidelines permitting.
East Bend Mayor Archie Hicks expressed disappointment about the event cancellation, but said the town was “fully supportive, of the postponement of this great annual event in light of the uncertainty surrounding COVID-19.”
“Our hopes are that the state and community will be in a position that will allow the event to take place in September,” said Hicks. “This will be contingent on any mandates from state government regarding mass gatherings. The health and safety of our citizens must remain a priority.”
Yadkin County Fire Marshal Ricky Leonard cautioned area residents to avoid using illegal fireworks to mark the holiday. Certain fireworks are illegal to sell or possess in North Carolina including firecrackers, ground spinners, bottle rockets, Roman candles, and aerial fireworks. A simple rule of thumb; anything that explodes or is projected into the air is illegal, said Leonard.
“I like fireworks as much as anyone, and will greatly miss seeing those this holiday season,” said Leonard. “But, I would rather keep my family and I safe to be able to see them again another time by a professional display.”
“During my career I have responded to several incidents involving fireworks, from mild burns ranging to devastating injuries,” continued Leonard. “I had the opportunity to attend a firework class a few years ago, where I witnessed fails and malfunctions that potentially occur. The instructor demonstrated consumer grade fireworks that were bought just across state lines. These fireworks stated how they were to burn, but they reacted in a totally different manner. For instance one stated purple rain shower, one would think it would have a purple fountain effect, no that one exploded violently. I have always respected and knew the dangers of the consumer fireworks but this class solidified that.”
Leonard also noted that the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) indicates that more than 19,500 fires per year are due to fireworks resulting in around $43 million dollars in property damage. Burns account for 44% of the 9,100 injuries treated in emergency rooms seen in the month around July 4.
While sparklers, fountains and novelty fireworks items that do not explode or are not intended to spin or to leave the ground and fly through the air, are permitted for use in North Carolina, Leonard still emphasized the importance of safety. Wire sparklers, often even given to children, burn at 1200 degrees. Sparklers account for roughly one-quarter of emergency room fireworks injuries, according to the NFPA.
Alternate July 4 celebration ideas include using glow sticks, noise makers or red, white, and blue silly string. Other ideas include making a patriotic craft, hosting an outdoor movie night or throwing a birthday part for the USA with a patriotic themed cake.
Kitsey Burns Harrison may be reached at 336-679-2341 or on Twitter and Instagram @RippleReporterK.
