Expedia Partner Solutions (EPS) is launching a partnership with Travala.com to enable payments with over 30 cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin, Ethereum and Ripple.
In May 2020, Travala merged with the leading blockchain travel agency, TravelbyBit.
In a press release published on July 6th, Travala platform announced the launch of a partnership with Expedia Partner Solutions (EPS), a subsidiary of Expedia Group. Through the partnership and powered by EPS’s API, called Rapid, cryptocurrency payment will be enabled for more than 700,000 Expedia Group hotels. Travala allows users to pay for their accommodations with more than 30 cryptocurrencies including Bitcoin (BTC) , Ethereum (ETH ), Ripple (XRP ), Binance Coin (BNC ), among others.
Senior Vice President at Expedia Group, Alfonso Paredes, said that EPS is passionate about innovation. In that sense, they recognize that there is a need to expand payment options for users. Paredes added:
Our aim is to support Travala.com to scale their business faster than ever before. Through our expansive travel supply, partner support and cutting-edge technology, we specialize in helping partners like Travala.com build fantastic experiences for their travelers.
On the other hand, Travala.com’s CEO and co-founder, Juan Otero, said that the adoption of cryptocurrencies is growing. Therefore, from the platform they aim to ensure that users have a variety of payment methods with transparent prices. Otero says:
EPS Rapid is the best API product in the travel industry and this partnership unlocks greater accommodation choice and availability for our users, including 4- and 5-star hotels in top destinations.
Our latest month-on-month data shows consumer confidence and the desire for travel is returning, with an 81% increase in room nights booked and website traffic up 50% week-on-week. Working with Expedia means we can drive traveler loyalty throughout the recovery period, offering unparalleled last-minute availability and fantastic rates and offers.
In May 2020, says the statement, Travala merged with TravelbyBit to form the world’s largest blockchain travel agency. The merger was consolidated with the support of the crypto exchange platform Binance and allowed for greater ease of payment with cryptocurrencies. About this partnership, Binance CEO Changpeng Zhao stated the following:
Travala.com has proven their ability to build a world-class travel booking platform. We’re excited to see the development of Travala.com’s relationship with Expedia Group, as they enhance the use of cryptocurrency in travel.
