Read more on the Bulgarian Binary Options fraud here.
The sun is shining, and FX brokers are making hay. The primary FX venues have all reported strong gains in average daily volume (ADV) in March this year. CME Group and Refinitiv hit their highest levels since September 2014, while EBS reached the highest level since January 2013.
Read how Refinitiv hit the highest turnover across FX products since it started reporting data in April 2009 and more, in the Finance Magnates FX Record Volumes report .
Ripple MD Sees’ Shift to Digital’ After Coronavirus: Interview
In an exclusive Finance Magnates Interview, Navin Gupta, Managing Director of South Asia & MENA at Ripple, shared what he’s observed during the coronavirus and what the cryptocurrency is doing to grow in S. Asia & MENA.
The industry leader opened up on Ripple’s growth strategy as well, giving his take of the post-coronavirus digital landscape.
Catch the full Navin Gupta interview here.
BUX, the Dutch retail brokerage platform active in 25 European countries, announced this week the launch of its crypto platform offering commission-free trading services. Dubbed BUX Crypto, the public launch of the crypto-specific platform across Europe, followed its soft launch in early March.
Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
Will the Bitcoin Halving Still Boost the Price Post-Coronavirus?
In a widely read Finance Magnates analysis, we discussed whether the halving would have the same effect, post coronavirus, that analysts were saying it would in early 2020?
With exclusive input from experts such as Danny Scott, chief executive and founder of Bitcoin-to-fiat platform CoinCorner and Danny Donahue, editor-in-chief at CryptoDetail.com, we broke down exactly what could happen and what will happen with the bitcoin halving.
As Finance Magnates covered, Antonio Vieira Montero, Chairman of Santander Portugal, became the second victim of the disease in Portugal, passing away from coronavirus aged 73.
Vieira Montero was placed in quarantine after traveling to hit Italy earlier this month. He had been with the company for more than 20 years.
Funding in the Time of Corona: How Fintech Startups are Surviving
The coronavirus is changing the way that fintech startups are funded. Which companies will survive–and thrive?
In a very popular Finance Magnates analysis, we discussed why the coronavirus is particularly bad for young companies? And what actions they need to take to succeed.
Industry leaders including Ksenia Yudina, chief executive and founder of UNest, Carlos Domingo, co-founder and chief executive of Securitize, and Peter Colis, chief executive of venture-backed life insurtech startup Ethos, all provided valuable insight and interesting answers.
