Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
Ripple must now file a response by mid-September.
“That filing will be the first time in the already-long history of this litigation that Ripple will substantively respond to the allegations around XRP,” said Jake Chervinsky, general counsel at crypto lending startup Compound Finance, told Coindesk , a bitcoin and cryptocurrency news website.
Ripple's XRP is currently the third-largest cryptocurrency behind bitcoin and ethereum, with a market capitalization of $11.4 billion. Ripple controls some 60% of XRP tokens.
The price of Ripple's XRP has fallen over the last year despite promises from the company it's ... [+] poised to sign deals with some of the world's biggest bank to use its technology.
Ripple has been battling the lawsuit since May last year when investor Ryan Coffey filed the first of several lawsuits against Ripple, its XRP II subsidiary, and its chief executive Brad Garlinghouse.
Coffey was later joined by other Ripple investors Vladi Zakinov, Avner Greenwald and David Oconer, with Bradley Sostack being appointed as lead plaintiff.
Meanwhile, Ripple this week announced its investment arm, Xpring, gave a 1 billion XRP grant (worth around $265 million at current prices) to browser-based payment processing startup Coil for help building a community of "creators, consumers and strategic partners."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
