— Liquidity Index Bot (@LiquidityB) February 4, 2020
In a recent interview , Daniel Vogel, CEO and co-founder of Bitso, said that Bitso is pursuing major goals together with Ripple. By the end of the year, Vogel and his company aim to capture 20 percent of the weekly remittance market share in the U.S./Mexico payment corridor:
We are finally capitalizing on the huge cross-border flow that exists between the U.S. and Mexico, which is between $30 and $36 billion a year […] We’ve built the product alongside with Ripple, and we’re seeing a significant amount of traction, and we believe that this is just the beginning of something […]
The stretch goal that I have set for the company is that we get to 20% of the weekly remittances [between the US/Mexico corridor]by the end of 2020.
Vogel also said that with Bitso he is planning to expand into two promising countries in South America:
We just launched a beta in Argentina, which should become a full-blown experience starting next month, and we have a team in Brazil that is actively looking into Brazil. It’s an interesting jurisdiction because it’s a large market — it’s the largest economy in Latin America.
The crypto derivatives exchange BitMEX announced today that it is introducing a new open-ended swap contract for XRP. The XRP/USD swap contract will go live at 4:00 UTC on February 5. Arthur Hayes, co-founder and CEO of BitMEX announced the news via Twitter. With regard to a possible criticism from some crypto enthusiasts, Hayes said he does not care what XRP is called by them because it is worth more than zero.
Is it called Ripple, XRP, or dogshit? Who knows, who cares. It’s worth more than zero so it’s time to trade the USD pair on BitMEX. Boo-Yaka-sha!
According to the information on BitMEX’s website, the contract will offer up to 50x leverage. The total margin is expressed in Bitcoin, which means that traders can only buy or sell the contract with Bitcoin.
Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and don’t miss any hot news anymore! Do you like our price indices ?
