MoneyGram announced a stellar growth of digital payments in 2019.
XRP/USD retreated from 1-hour SMA100 at $0.2040.
Ripple's XRP is the fourth largest digital asset with the current market value of $8.9 billion and an average daily trading volume of $1 billion. The coin has been range-bound recently amid low trading activity on the market. At the time of writing, XRP/USD is trading at $0.2025, mostly unchanged both on a day-to-day basis and since the beginning of Wednesday.
MoneyGram shares jumped by 16% in a matter of hours following the news that the company doubled the number of digital transactions in 2019. According to the official press-release, the MoneyGram is focused on becoming a leader in digitalizing money transfers.
Our digital business growth in May is particularly notable as we not only increased our active digital customer base, but also continued to see these new digital customers return and transact more frequently due to our seamless customer experience and global platform.
Notably, the cryptocurrency startup Ripple invested $50 million in MoneyGram in 2019. However, earlier this year the company sold all XRP worth approximately $11.3 million, received from Ripple.
On the intraday charts, XRP/USD recovery is limited by 1-hour SMA100 at $0.2026. The price attempted to clear this level several times on Wednesday, to no avail.  A sustainable move above this area is needed for the upside to gain traction with the next focus at $0.2040 reinforced by 1-hour SMA200 and the upper boundary of the recent consolidation channel.
On the downside, the initial support is created by the lower line of the 1-hour Bollinger Band at $0.2010. This barrier is closely followed by the psychological $0.2000. If it is broken, the sell-off may gain traction with the next focus on $0.1980 (June 7 low).
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
