A recent statement about XRP by Galaxy Digital's CEO, Mike Novogratz, caused Ripple CEO, Brad Garlinghouse to respond with statements regarding the coin's performance.
After Novogratz said that XRP is likely to have a bad year, Garlinghouse stressed that XRP is up by 44% in 2020, and that it outperformed even XRP.
Even so, XRP is far from being the only coin to surge, and many believe that its progress is part of a massive market recovery.
responded to criticisms of his company’s cryptocurrency, XRP. According to him,
XRP has had an extremely successful first month of 2020, with some impressive
gains that allowed the coin to go up by 44% on the year-to-date chart.
He notes that BTC only saw a 33% growth,
Ahem… IS THIS THING ON… can I get a fact check on aisle CoinDesk?
XRP has outperformed BTC and the broader crypto market in 2020. XRP is up 44% (19.1 to 27.5) vs BTC's 33% (7,100 to 9,500) so far this year. #factsmatter https://t.co/KAdFqD93t1
— Brad Garlinghouse (@bgarlinghouse) February 5, 2020
Garlinghouse’s statement came as a response to the recent news shared by Coinbase , which reported that Bitcoin bull, Mike Novogratz, who is also the CEO of Galaxy Digital, stated that XRP will have another lackluster year. Novogratz supposedly said this in a room full of financial advisors during the Florida-based financial conference last week.
concerned about the fact that Ripple is still the largest holder of XRP.
policy of selling the portion of its holdings each month.
1. GLXY is a big investor in Ripple Labs. I would like to see them do well. @bgarlinghouse has done a great job as ceo. I commented the XRP tokens underperformed $btc last year because Ripple owns a lot of them. I have been almost solely long $btc for the past 15 months.
— Michael Novogratz (@novogratz) February 6, 2020
Novogratz’s ability to predict the future of the crypto market, reminding his
$20,000 by the end of 2020, which obviously did not happen.
of a wider market recovery?
The newest crypto drama is noteworthy, if for
criticism. More often than not, he would simply praise XRP, as the platform’s
nerve, despite the fact that he is not exactly the critic of XRP or Ripple.
currently has a value of $27.6.
Despite his claim, it is also worth noting that Garlinghouse does have a point, as XRP saw a rather impressive rebound. Still, it is not the only one, and its growth might only be a part of a larger market recovery.
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
