Home » Cryptocurrency » Ripple price aims lower, as the company works on loan offering
Ripple is developing its own lending solution, said a company representative for the Block. In the meantime, the price action is struggling to stay above $0.20 as the sellers eye a trip to $0.1750.
The new solution will offer working capital loans to RippleNet clients and the company is now looking for a new boss of product management for the loan unit.
“We are expanding our offering to loans to further support our customers with their working capital needs – something that we know is a huge pain point for many of them,” said the Ripple representative.
The working capital loans that Ripple plans to provide to its customers are commonly requested by SMEs to fund their daily business activities.
The new loan offering will operate in connection with Ripple’s on-demand liquidity payment system (ODL), which utilizes the XRP token.
Despite the fact that the lending product is still in its initial stages, RippleNet customers have already provided positive feedback,said the technology company.
“The offering is still in its early stages, but we have received positive feedback from several customers. Global payments remain at the heart of our business, and we are excited to find new ways to serve our existing and prospective RippleNet customers,” Ripple spokesperson added.
However, given that the company will use XRP on a cross-border basis loan purposes, it will face some regulatory obstacles. Still, it’s early to say what will happen and Ripple might be able to address those legal barriers.
Since it’s still in the early stages, precise details of the solution remain unknown. The company says it’s looking to hire someone who will bring its new solution to market “from concept to launch”. The new loan division director should be someone who has “strong leadership skills” as they will be working together with internal teams and clients.
The company’s plan to hire a lending solution director comes a few months after it secured $200 million in Series C funding round.
Earlier this month, Invezz reported that Ripple revealed that it sold only $1.75 million in XRP coins in Q1, a decrease of 87% compared to the last year.
Ripple is struggling to stay above $0.20 after breaking below $0.2150 a few days ago. The third largest digital coin by market capitalization left the ascending wedge and pushed lower to print a new 1-month low near $0.1750.
The price action is now trading below the key confluence of technical indicators that is extremely important in the short-term. A break above $0.22 would open the door for a move higher, while the prolonged stay below this zone is likely to generate more selling pressure.
Ripple is struggling to trade above $0.20 after breaking below a key support zone around the $0.2150. In the meantime, the XRP parent company is working on XRP-backed lending solutions.
Specialising in economics by academia, with a passion for financial trading, Michael Harris has been a regular contributor to Invezz. His passion has given him first hand experience of trading, while his writing means he understands the market forces and wider regulation.
