Ripple describes that the use and adaptation of XRP is progressing.
In particular, larger institutional traders will bring more liquidity to the market and thus further promote the spread of XRP.
Despite the continuing corona crisis, the distribution and use of XRP is increasing. Ripple provides various payment technologies to enable companies of all sizes to make cross-border payments in real time and at low prices. A new report states that Ripple expects to see another increase in global transaction volume in the coming months.
The great advantage of Ripple’s On-Demand Liquidity (ODL) payment technology, formerly known as xRapid, is the immediate provision of liquidity. XRP can be sent directly, without the need for a central intermediary, to exchange two different currencies quickly and efficiently. Ripple points out that using XRP creates high liquidity, further reducing the cost of each transaction and increasing the robustness of the network.
The use of ODL has continued to grow in recent months, with a growing number of financial institutions and payment providers trading with XRP. This will increase liquidity and on-demand liquidity volume in the target corridors:
The more value transfer problems it helps to solve and payment frictions it helps to reduce; the more diverse and efficient the adoption of XRP as a global payment asset will become.
The CFO of the Mexican exchange, Bitso, explains that the use of ODL has greatly reduced the cost of transfers compared to traditional transfers, so that customers pay only a “fraction” of the original cost. Ripple already entered into a partnership with Bitso last year to handle up to 20% of all transfers between the United States and Mexico in the future.
Ripple describes that partner exchanges that do not use ODL will also promote further expansion, as they too “are becoming more and more mainstream” and offer trading with XRP. Ripple continues to strive to research new use cases in addition to the traditional remittance business and to promote its development:
Identifying new use cases for digital assets outside of cross-border remittances will also deepen the trading pool and liquidity for XRP. As real-world solutions are solved with this technology, it will attract new, larger groups of traders, leading to even more volume and liquidity.
The bank application Xumm is intended to make the use of a normal bank account superfluous in the long term, as the application offers all banking services like a normal bank account. Xumm can be used to manage Fiat currencies, view contact information and check transaction tracking. Xumm was launched at the end of March with 3,700 active users, but is still in the beta phase.
Ripple is also working on a next-generation trading platform to be embedded into the existing ODL system architecture. It should be possible to issue assets on the XRP ledger that are linked to an external value of another asset or currency. Another important market is the decentralized financial markets.
Ripple developer Warren Paul Andersson is currently working on improving the interoperability between XRP and ETH, as XRP does not yet have a function to execute smart contracts, which are important for the DeFi market. This should close the bridges between XRP and ETH as well as ERC20 tokens in the long term and ensure smooth functionality.
The price of XRP follows the current market trend and recorded a minus of 3.87% to a price of $0.1840 within the last 24 hours.
Follow us on Facebook and Twitter and don’t miss any hot news anymore! Do you like our price indices ?
