Bitcoin has risen over 200% since the start of 2019 after losing some 80% of its value last year as the likes of Facebook and other Silicon Valley giants eye cryptocurrencies , taken by many as proof of bitcoin and XRP's potential.
Ripple CEO Brad Garlinghouse was speaking at the Fortune Brainstorm Finance 2019 conference when he... [+] made the comments about bitcoin and XRP.
"I think bitcoin is a store of value and people hold it," Garlinghouse added.
XRP has meanwhile added some 30% to its price so far this year after outperforming bitcoin and many other major cryptocurrencies last year thanks to some adoption of Ripple's products from the world's biggest banks.
Garlinghouse's interview turned the heads of some bitcoin and cryptocurrency analysts, with eToro's senior market analyst Mati Greenspan tweeting it's "quite a turnaround from [Garlinghouse]. Great stuff!"
The bitcoin price has rallied to highs not seen for more than a year over the last week.
Meanwhile, Garlinghouse said he wasn't worried about Facebook's announcement that it plans to launch a potential rival to both XRP and bitcoin, saying "it was a big deal for Ripple", and over time, people will believe it was "bigger deal for the cryptocurrency markets overall".
XRP leaped higher last week, fueling the bitcoin and wider cryptocurrency market rally after it was announced Ripple, which created the XRP protocol and owns some 60% of XRP tokens, planned to partner with cross-border money mover MoneyGram to settle its foreign exchange using XRP .
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
