Ripple’s CTO, David Schwartz, was part of a debate over the identity of Bitcoin’s creator, Satoshi Nakamoto.
Because of Satoshi Nakamoto’s number of skills, Schwartz thinks that it is likely that Satoshi was a group of people.
Schwartz said he’s a Bitcoin holder, but he’s selling more of his BTCs due to level of risk.
Despite the large amount of content created about the identity of Bitcoin’s creator, Satoshi Nakamoto, the mystery continues to generate debate in the crypto community. In the most recent one, important personalities from the crypto space participated including the most plausible candidate to be Satoshi, Blockstream’s CEO Adam Back. Ripple’s CTO, David Schwartz, was also part of the discussion with a fresh theory.
Schwartz responded to a list of possible candidates for Satoshi’s identity that included him along with the late Hal Finney, Nick Szabo and Adam Back. Regarding speculation by various users, Back said that Satoshi’s identity will never be known because of the ability of some cyberpunks to use the Internet without leaving a trace. Either way, Back said Bitcoin is a decentralized digital asset that works best without a founder. A developer from Ripple, Nik Bougalis, responded:
I disagree with Adam Back on several things. This isn’t one of them. He’s absolutely right: “Bitcoin is better as a decentralised digital commodity without a founder.” The fact that Satoshi not only realized this but acted on it showcases both his brilliance and his principles.
Ripple’s CTO ruled out the possibility that he is Satoshi Nakamoto. Schwartz said it’s more plausible that Satoshi is a small group of people, rather than just one. Ripple’s CTO said that Satoshi’s different skills and the amount of work he did make the above theory more plausible. Schwartz believes it is unlikely that a single person is Satoshi. Ripple’s CTO added the following:
It’s much more plausible to say that I was one of the people involved than that I was Satoshi. I certainly could have been one of the people involved. But, unfortunately for me, I didn’t find out about bitcoin until 2011.
Ripple’s CTO outlined that it’s unfortunate that he didn’t hear about Bitcoin before 2011 because he didn’t have time to buy millions of Bitcoins. Referring to the case of Craig Wright versus Ira Kleiman, in which Wright claimed to be Satoshi Nakamoto, but said he had lost access to his BTCs, Schwartz joked that he kept his keys private. Finally, when Adam Back asked him if he’s turning his XRP into Bitcoin, Schwarz said:
Nope. I’ve been slowly selling Vitcoin for the past several years. I’m still bullish on Vitcoin, it’s just the level of risk that has me selling.
