Ripple seems to be preparing for the development of a new loans product, judging from a recent job offering.
Not much is known about the product so far, although if Ripple does intend to launch one.
The company is in a position to transform the working capital loans sector due to its connections.
Crypto startup Ripple recently added a new job opening on its website . The new offer indicates that the company might have plans for the development of a new product.
The job opening is for a ‘Director of Product Management, Loans,’ which would hint at the upcoming loan product.
Of course, this would not exactly be surprising, considering how big crypto loans are becoming. However, so far, Ripple did not hint at joining the loan game, and the new loan product would certainly help its users with working capital loans.
These are loans that companies can take in order to support their everyday operations. They can only cover the firms’ expenses in the short term, but sometimes, that can be invaluable.
Furthermore, a blockchain-based loan product could even reduce the waiting time for the firms that need loans. Not to mention less paperwork, greater transparency, and full accountability of everyone and anyone involved.
In addition to all that, it is worth noting that Ripple already has a massive reach in the financial industry. The company has partnered with hundreds of banks and financial institutions, many of which are major ones. As such, it is in a unique position to create a product that would bring huge benefits to anyone seeking loans.
So far, the company already created other products for financial institutions to benefit from, including its altcoin and the third-largest cryptocurrency, XRP . It demonstrated that it has a deep insight into what the financial industry needs, and how to deliver it. Of course, it is constantly working on further improving its products, especially when it comes to its remittance system.
Recently, on May 10th, yet another major bank from Dubai announced that it started using RippleNet. The institution, known as RAKBank, praised Ripple’s remittance payments that can be performed ‘within minutes.’
Similar announcements came regarding Thailand and South Korean companies, as Ripple continues to disrupt the remittance sector in the area.
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
