The choppiness in the recent four-hour candle price action of Ripple continues; to start the current 4 hour candle, it came in at a price of 0.178 US dollars, up 0.91% ($0.0016) since the last 4 hour candle. Relative to other instruments in the Top Cryptos asset class, Ripple ranked 2nd since the last 4 hour candle in terms of percentage price change.
The back and forth price flow continues for Ripple, which started today off at 0.1764 US dollars, up 0.86% ($0.0015) from the previous day. This move happened on lower volume, as yesterday’s volume was down 14.87% from the day before — and down 23.25% from the same day the week before. Ripple outperformed all 5 assets in the Top Cryptos asset class since the previous day. The daily price chart of Ripple below illustrates.
Coming into today Ripple is now close to its 20 day averages, located at 0.18 respectively, and thus may be at a key juncture along those timeframes. The clearest trend exists on the 14 day timeframe, which shows price moving down over that time. For another vantage point, consider that Ripple’s price has gone up 5 of the previous 10 trading days.
Special #FF today goes out to two accounts that have been instrumental in the fight against FUD for $XRP. @galgitron and his blog are chalk-full of FUD busting info.@sentosumosaba is my new favorite source for $XRP news. Follow them if you want the REAL FACTS about $XRP!
Anyone who does a $LINK ‘giveaway’  for follows deserves a block. We are a better community than that. I don’t want some shithouse influencer jumping on the bandwagon and superseding the OGs as the voice of the marines. That shits for XRP and LTC and TRX and all the usual garbage
In terms of news links for Ripple here’s one to try:
Ripple’s XRP Granted with Approval for Money Transfers by U.S.
Ripple’s XRP has got approval for being used in cross-border money transfers from the U.S.Consumer Financial Protection Bureau….Ripple‘s XRP has received permission from America’s Consumer Financial Protection Bureau….The Bureau stated:  “The Bureau has continued to monitor…the continued growth and expanding partnerships of virtual currency companies, such as Ripple, which offer both a payment messaging platform to support cross-border money transfers as well as a virtual currency, XRP, which can be used to effect a settlement of those transfers.” This comes at a time when cryptocurrencies continue to face regulatory scrutiny….This has made Ripple labs to become one of the newest heavy hitters in the financial space.
