Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
The platform will also work with participants that are not involved in blockchain. “It’s a platform for all developers, not just developers in the [...] blockchain and crypto space, but [...] all 23 million developers around the globe,” Beard explained.
“More specifically, what we’re aiming to do with the platform is provide developers with various tools, services and programs to make it easier for them to build on [the] XRP Ledger and to leverage Interledger Protocol,” Beard said. Interledger Protocol (ILP) essentially provides compatibility when transferring value across various systems or blockchains, according to Interledger.org. Interledger Protocol and the XRP Ledger are both open source.
"Ultimately, we want the Xpring Platform to bring money to the Internet at the same core level as text, images and video [do] today," Beard said.
Ripple’s main goal essentially is to provide simple and fast value transfer on the web. “We’re working to bring money to the internet,” Beard explained. Under this goal, Ripple has two main areas of focus, he said. One area is Ripple’s “global payments network, called RippleNet, for financial institutions.”
Ripple’s other focus is that of Xpring, an initiative the company announced in 2018, Beard detailed. Xpring “really came on board just to look at how best to build an ecosystem of companies that are using XRP, that are using technologies like Interledger Protocol.”
The last 12 months have included numerous partnerships and investments, the Xpring senior vice president said. “We’ve partnered with or invested in over 20 companies that are using XRP and [are] aligned with the vision that we have, and have committed over $500 million to that ecosystem,” Beard said.
Explaining the reasoning behind Xpring’s move toward a blockchain development platform, Beard noted, “During those conversations, and as we started working closely with our partners, it became clear that they were looking for more than just investments.” Additionally, “to support the growth and the development of the XRP ecosystem, we really needed to make it easier to build with these technologies and allow our customers and our partners to focus on solving real world customer problems,” Beard said.
Ripple and Xpring are closely tied to the XRP asset. Using XRP, however, is not a necessity when working with Xpring, Beard clarified to me. “Everything we’ve built and released is open-sourced,” he said, adding, “so you can do with it what you please,” he said.
Note: This article has been updated, correcting $5 million to $500 million in the ninth paragraph.
I am a full-time writer in the cryptocurrency space. My writing experience includes writing for Crypto Insider, CCN, and CryptoPotato on news and other important
I am a full-time writer in the cryptocurrency space. My writing experience includes writing for Crypto Insider, CCN, and CryptoPotato on news and other important concepts. I am also a part-time crypto trader and find trading fascinating. I know my way around price charts, indicators, hardware wallets, and almost any notable exchange. Additionally, I have a podcast (Crypto: Secrets of the Trade) where I interview successful traders in the space regarding their stories and methods. I hold a small amount of BTC, BCH, ETH, LTC, XMR, ZEC and NEO, as well as various insignificant altcoin positions. I also hold stock positions in CBOE, AU, AUY, MUX, CFWFF and TOLWF. Connect with me on Twitter (@BenjaminPirus).
