0.188 (USD) was the opening price of the four-hour candle for Ripple, resulting in the previous 4 hours being one in which price moved up 0.91% ($0.0017) from the previous 4 hours. Relative to other instruments in the Top Cryptos asset class, Ripple ranked 3rd since the previous 4 hours in terms of percentage price change.
The choppiness in the recent daily price action of Ripple continues; to start today, it came in at a price of 0.1772 US dollars, down 0.51% ($0.0009) since the day prior. The price move occurred on volume that was up 0.6% from the day prior, but down 16.61% from the same day the week before. Ripple outperformed all 5 assets in the Top Cryptos asset class since the day prior. The daily price chart of Ripple below illustrates.
The first thing we should note is that the current price of Ripple is sitting close to its 20 day moving averages; moving average crosses often indicate a change in momentum, so this may be worth keeping an eye on. Trend traders will want to observe that the strongest trend appears on the 30 day horizon; over that time period, price has been moving down. Or to view things another way, note that out of the past 10 days Ripple’s price has gone up 6 them.
For laughs, fights, or genuinely useful information, let’s see what the most popular tweets pertaining to Ripple for the past day were:
LATAM guys. Bitso June 26 Launched their new Digital Payments App to ARGENTINA ~ No Fee, Instant & Assured Liquidity Crypto to Fiat. + Bitso #XRP remittances are UP while Mexico is down. Busting in growth. WED~ Ripple & Bitso on Crypto Payments Panel together @ArcadeXrp Schedule.
Have a feeling many people will be caught with their pants down when XRP takes off. It will be without warning, and it will be violent. A little diversity is fine, but don’t forget who the king of the jungle is just because he’s taking a nap.
To me it seems the infrastructure for banks using XRP was not ready in 2018. How could they use XRP when there was no liquidity?
ODL partner exchanges were not ready, right? Markets not open.
No Polysign to hold XRP. Not just regulations. It looks different now.
For a longer news piece related to XRP that’s been generating discussion, check out:
New Ripple / XRP corridor to India? Regulators kill digital innovation
Ripple executives referred to India’s ban on cryptocurrencies, caused by a lawsuit by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)….The Ripple executive then stressed that a framework and regulatory authority for cryptocurrencies must be created….Ripple executives said the country is still feeling the impact of a campaign against cryptocurrencies that began in 2013.
