The sold tokens had a value of approximately £9.65 million.
Despite selling a large volume of XRP, McCaleb did not impact the market negatively.
McCaleb still has billions of XRP to sell.
Jed McCaleb, Ripple’s co-founder sold 54 million XRP in the past month. The Crypto Associate analyzed McCaleb’s known stellar (XLM) and ripple (XRP) wallets to find this information. Per the findings published on May 1, McCaleb has been liquidating his XRP supply regularly.
According to the report , McCaleb sold an average of 1.8 million XRP per day throughout April. Reportedly, this figure is equivalent to approximately £320,200. Cumulatively, he sold 54,215,405 XRP, which is worth around £9.65 million.
Despite selling such a large volume of XRP over such a short time, McCaleb did not impact the market negatively. XRP started April trading at around £0.14 and ended the month changing hands at £0.18.
McCaleb is renowned in the crypto sphere due to his significant involvement in several crypto projects. Apart from co-founding Ripple (previously known as OpenCoin), McCaleb also created the infamous Mt. Gox exchange and co-founded Stellar (XLM).
After founding Ripple alongside Chris Larsen and Arthur Britto, McCaleb and the other two founders gifted themselves 20 billion XRP out of the 100 billion pre-mined coins. Out of the 20 billion coin, McCaleb got 9.5 billion XRP.
Larsen decided to gift 7 billion XRP to an independent foundation that seeks to help the financially underserved population. Arthur, on the other hand, committed his XRP to a specific lock-up period. However, McCaleb decided to sell his portion. This became a controversial issue that saw XRP’s price plunge 40 percent in just 24 hours. As a result, Ripple’s board had a sit-down with McCaleb to discuss limits for selling his XRP in 2016.
Per the agreement , McCaleb’s selling limits were,
$20,000 per week during the second, third and fourth years
According to McCaleb, he has been very open about selling his XRP holdings. He believes that others have sold more tokens than he has thus far.
“I have been transparent from the beginning. The market has known for years that I have been selling my XRP at a slow, steady rate. My investment decisions are not based on any desire to negatively impact other companies in this industry. I think the history to date shows there is no impact on the market, and I don’t see any reason why that will change.”
Do you think Jed McCaleb’s regular sale of XRP might cripple the Ripple ecosystem? Share your thoughts in the comment section below.
