Ripple set to offer more features to users by including stablecoins to its XRP platform.
The company says the new feature will be of immense value to users, third parties, and other companies.
The new feature likely to be used in launching fixed value tokens on the XRP ledger, but there will be other benefits.
Ripple is a blockchain-based financial services network that offers a convenient, safe, and user-friendly wallet for XRP cryptocurrency holders. However, the company announced that it plans to expand the features it offers on the XRP platform .
Ripple says it’s going to include stablecoins to its XRP ledger . Since its establishment in 2012, RippleNet has seen some significant developments.
transactions on its decentralized platform for a long time. But it seems their
the platform that would allow users mint stablecoins, an asset-backed token.
Officer, the company will soon add the new feature on the XRP platform. He also
development of well-known features of blockchain. According to him, “Proof-of-Work
Ripple Foundation announced the introduction of stablecoins on the XRP platform last month when it released a video to that effect. Now the company wants to make that promise a reality to give users better trading and investment options .
unveil other third-party crypto assets on the XRP system.
development because ledger mechanics guarantee liquidity. Furthermore, the
to launch fixed value tokens on the XRP ledger. He said the most obvious use of
the additional features is on stablecoins, but even assets linked to external
values can also use the new features.
to investors and users of the platform. He explained that Ripple does not
intend to establish different markets for each digital asset. Instead, trading
will be carried out on XRP while the stablecoin will remain liquid despite its popularity.
Ripple has shown an increased desire to invest and partner with companies that could aid its own growth. The company has invested massively in other transmission networks, such as its recent $11.3 million partnership with MoneyGram .
stablecoin layers on different networks at the same time.
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
