Wednesday’s ruling from U.S. District Judge Phyllis Hamilton didn’t delve into whether the XRP cryptocurrency meets the definition of a security outlined under federal law, but did find that the class action lawsuits were filed within the applicable time limit.
By Ross Todd | February 26, 2020 at 06:36 PM
Your article was successfully shared with the contacts you provided.
A federal judge in Oakland has largely turned back a bid from lawyers for San Francisco-based financial technology company Ripple Labs who were seeking to knock out claims that sales of its XRP cryptocurrency violated state and federal securities laws.
Become a Free ALM Digital Reader.
Benefits of a Digital Membership:
Ross Todd is the Editor/columnist for the Am Law Litigation Daily. He writes about litigation of all sorts. Previously, Ross was the Bureau Chief of The Recorder, ALM's California affiliate. Contact Ross at rtodd@alm.com. On Twitter: @Ross_Todd.
Ten California businesses, including two law firms, filed class actions alleging major banks such as Wells Fargo and Bank of America prioritized larger loan applicants as part of the federal $349 billion Paycheck Protection Program.
While Judge Michael Brown in Atlanta has cut his backlog to zero, other judges are still wrestling with long-pending motions. In the Eastern District of California, Judge Troy Nunley's six-month motions fell from 133 to 109 amid what the court's judges have described as a "caseload crisis."
The class action complaint asks the Northern District of California to require YouTube to open up its Content ID copyright identification tool to everyone.
Law Offices of Mark E. Salomone
With this subscription you will receive unlimited access to high quality, online, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry. This is perfect for attorneys licensed in multiple jurisdictions or for attorneys that have fulfilled their CLE requirement but need to access resourceful information for their practice areas.
Our Team Account subscription service is for legal teams of four or more attorneys. Each attorney is granted unlimited access to high quality, on-demand premium content from well-respected faculty in the legal industry along with administrative access to easily manage CLE for the entire team.
Gain access to some of the most knowledgeable and experienced attorneys with our 2 bundle options! Our Compliance bundles are curated by CLE Counselors and include current legal topics and challenges within the industry. Our second option allows you to build your bundle and strategically select the content that pertains to your needs. Both options are priced the same.
Dynamically explore and compare data on law firms, companies, individual lawyers, and industry trends.
Legal Compass includes access to our exclusive industry reports, combining the unmatched expertise of our analyst team with ALM’s deep bench of proprietary information to provide insights that can’t be found anywhere else.
Legal Compass delivers you the full scope of information, from the rankings of the Am Law 200 and NLJ 500 to intricate details and comparisons of firms’ financials, staffing, clients, news and events.
Annual conference bringing together the leaders of independent law firms from around the world, from 40+ jurisdictions.
ACE Leadership Forum & Expo is the annual conference for Senior Claims Executives in Insurance organizations.
Consulting magazine is proud to recognize this unique group of movers & shakers at our annual Rising Stars of Profession awards.
Webcast Date:  July 29, 2020 | Join this webcast for best practices and lessons learned for investigations.
Webcast Date: Wednesday, July 22, 2020 | According to a recent Gallup study, 62% of U.S. employees worked from home this past April, reflecting a global migration to remote environments as the COVID-19 pandemic spread.
Webcast Date: Wednesday, July 22, 2020 | Privacy remains one of the top issues for in-house counsel and law firms, and those issues underscoring the need for data privacy have become even more pronounced with the onset of the global COVID-19 pandemic.
Premier investment fund seeks 3+ year attorney for high impact role advising on wide range of matters surrounding fund s investment process,...
Terrific southern New Hampshire law firm seeks 3+ year associate with entrepreneurial spirit and family law experience to join diverse pract...
Full service law firm conveniently located on Route 23 in Wayne seeks solo or small practice to join our collegial office with comfortable a...
