SATURDAY KITCHEN continued this weekend with Matt Tebbutt back in the driving seat, but in a candid moment, the host revealed just what the future holds for the BBC cooking show.
Sign up for FREE now and never miss the top Royal stories again.
We will use your email address only for sending you newsletters. Please see our Privacy Notice for details of your data protection rights.
Matt Tebbutt is used to having all his guests in the studio with him including fellow chefs, but since the lockdown was announced back in March, Saturday Kitchen like most other live shows have had to strip their sets back to skeleton staff. However, with so many shows’ futures hanging in the current Covid-19 balance, Matt has revealed just what is coming for the BBC cooking show.
Matt was joined by Jason Atherton, Jane Baxter and Olly Smith and today’s special guest was singer Katherine Jenkins who joined via video call.
Katherine was asked to fish out a number of ingredients that Matt could turn into a proper dish later in the show.
She explained that in all her lockdown vegetable boxes, she kept being given turnips with no idea how to use them.
Viewers were asked to choose between Gnocchi with onion purée, pickled turnips, and mushrooms or Confit turnips with mushroom consommé.
Saturday Kitchen Live host Matt Tebbutt has revealed what's to come for the show (Image: BBC)
Saturday Kitchen Live: Matt Tebbutt welcomed Katherine Jenkins today (Image: BBC)
Jason explained: “Today, we have a really simple, I like everything on toast so sardines.
Matt added: “Looks very beautiful and of course you love everything on toast.
Jane said: “This is going to be really simple, I will be making a cherry clafouti with a cherry ripple ice cream with a chocolate sauce.”
Matt Tebbutt introduced his guests today and revealed what was going on with the future of the show (Image: BBC)
Saturday Kitchen fans were baffled by the amount of wine the guests were drinking so early in the morning (Image: BBC)
Matt waited for her to continue and then said: “A woman of few words I was looking for more - bit like rehearsals eh?
Matt revealed: “Yes, well hopefully this will all go back to normal soon,” hinting that things could be changing very soon.
