Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
"That is important to understand not only for investors and those building out payment infrastructure, but also those building out solutions leveraging the security of a public blockchain."
Bitcoin currently has a market capitalization of $180 billion, compared to ethereum's $20 billion, litecoin's $4.5 billion, and $11 billion for Ripple's XRP.
However, Schei argued that market capitalization without considering liquidity is meaningless.
"The main reason is that one could easily create a cryptocurrency with 1 billion premined coins, and do one trade at say three dollars each," Schei wrote. "This would lead to a total market capitalization of $3 billion, which would represent 1% market dominance with today’s valuations and inflate the total market capitalization."
"The problem is that the calculation does not take liquidity into account. One might be able to sell one token for three dollars, but what happens if you want to sell 1 million? Without accounting for liquidity, market capitalization becomes a meaningless measure."
Researchers found similar results when looking at the 10 exchanges identified by Bitwise as those having "real" (not wash trade) volume and if using volumes as recorded on CoinMarketCap, excluding stablecoins.
If cryptocurrency exchange volume is included when calculating bitcoin's dominance, it increases to ... [+] over 90%.
However, researchers were keen to stress the data doesn't mean the likes of ethereum, litecoin, and Ripple's XRP are without use or value.
"It is notoriously difficult to compare and contrast different projects targeting different niches," Schei wrote.
"Every quantitative measure will at best be a proxy and always brush over important qualitative differences. For crypto, one could argue that the whole idea of measuring the relative strength of different coins and tokens falsely implies a competition between complementary solutions."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
