Stillwater Brands Launches Ripple QuickSticks, the Newest Way to Consume Fast-Acting Cannabis with Powder and Precision
DENVER--( BUSINESS WIRE )-- Stillwater Brands (the “Company”), leader in cannabis dissolvables and edibles, launched its latest product innovation: Ripple QuickSticks . Ripple QuickSticks come in single-serve packets of flavored powder that dissolve directly on the tongue. A brand-new offering, the powders are available in three flavors with different THC:CBD ratios.
Known for its original Ripple Dissolvables , a flavorless powder that can be mixed into food and beverages, the Company created QuickSticks with the consistent, fast-acting technology that has made Ripple a consumer favorite. To reimagine the Dissolvables, the Stillwater team designed QuickSticks with a novel delivery method featuring flavors that dissolve immediately on the tongue, creating an entirely different consumption experience.
After researching more than 100 flavor combinations, the team perfected three: PURE, a Blueberry Pom flavor with 10mg THC per packet; BALANCED, a Gingerberry flavor with 5mg THC and 5mg CBD per packet; and RELIEF, a Mint Chocolate flavor with 20mg CBD and 0.5mg THC per packet. The flavors are all-natural and gluten-free, with zero calories and zero sugar.
“We take a customer-centric approach to product development, and that inspired us to create the QuickSticks,” said Coree Schmitz, General Manager of Stillwater Brands. “After seeing the growing passion for dissolvables, and understanding the need for more flavors and precise delivery methods, it was important that we continue innovating on our original Ripple effect to provide new and exciting ways to experience cannabis with predictable outcomes.”
QuickSticks are made with the proprietary Ripple technology that powers all Ripple products. Ripple’s research and development team has performed clinical studies on rate of absorption and bioavailability, finding that Ripple products have THC absorption within 15 minutes and CBD that is 650% more bioavailable within 15 minutes.
“The biggest challenge of working with cannabis-infused edibles is establishing a consistent product,” said Drew Hathaway, Senior Scientist. “That consistency comes from proven, tested food technology that can deliver the same effect every time. By bringing the Ripple team’s food science background to the cannabis space, we hope to elevate the standard for a quality consumption experience.”
Ripple QuickSticks are now available in more than 100 dispensaries throughout Colorado. To learn more about Ripple by Stillwater Brands, visit stillwaterbrands.life .
Stillwater Brands makes functional, consistent, and reliable cannabinoid-infused products under the Ripple brand name. Founded in 2014, Stillwater Brands’ deep background in food manufacturing and water soluble cannabinoid technology has led to the production of some of the best selling and most trusted edibles in Colorado, including Ripple Dissolvables, Ripple Gummies, and Ripple QuickSticks. Science leads the charge at Stillwater Brands, where the company strives to provide consumers with accurate information and consistent products, backed by research and technical substantiation. For more information, please visit https://stillwaterbrands.life/
