This briefing is no longer live. Updates can be found here .
Here’s what you need to know:
Here’s what else is happening.
Wall Street bounces back from Monday’s plunge.
Shares on Wall Street surged on Tuesday, rebounding from their sharpest drop in more than a decade, as investors seemed to take comfort from efforts in Washington to protect the economy from damage caused by the coronavirus outbreak.
President Trump met with Senate Republicans on Tuesday to pitch them on measures, including a payroll tax cut, to help the economy amid signs of a worsening outbreak in the United States. He is also considering using the Federal Emergency Management Agency as a vehicle for delivering funds to stimulate the economy, a move that would not require approval from Congress.
Though the rebound was at times wobbly, and shares dipped back into negative territory earlier in the day Tuesday, the S&P 500 ended nearly 5 percent higher — recouping more than half of the previous day’s losses — in its biggest one-day gain since December 2018.
“Markets are always enamored with tax cuts, or even the hope thereof. Yesterday’s sell-off was so extreme that it’s not at all surprising to see a bounce,” Steve Sosnick, chief strategist at Interactive Brokers in Greenwich, Conn., said in an email.
But analysts stressed that any recovery in the markets will likely be tenuous. The White House has not announced any specific measures yet, and increased testing for the coronavirus is expected to generate rising numbers of new infections in the coming weeks, which could be a new challenge for investors’ nerves.
Plus, measures like tax cuts, rebates or expanded insurance benefits and other spending increases, are far from guaranteed.
“Given the nation’s charged politics, especially in the lead-up to the presidential election, these steps could prove difficult if not impossible for lawmakers,” Mark Zandi, the chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, wrote in a note to clients on Tuesday.
In Monday’s global plunge, the S&P 500 fell nearly 8 percent, its sharpest daily decline since December 2008 and a tumble so swift that trading in the United States had to be halted for 15 minutes early in the day. In Asia and Europe, some of the biggest financial exchanges flirted with or crossed into bear market territory — a decline of more than 20 percent from their highs. Through Tuesday, the S&P 500 was down about 15 percent.
The price of oil, which had slumped by a quarter on Monday, rose about 8 percent on Tuesday. But oil prices remain down more than 40 percent this year.
Uber’s rides decline, while Lyft sees an increase.
There are competing theories about whether changing travel patterns caused by the coronavirus will help or hurt finances at ride-hailing companies like Uber and Lyft.
In a staff meeting with Uber employees on Tuesday, Uber’s chief financial officer, Nelson Chai, said the company still hoped to become profitable — excluding certain expenses — by the final quarter of this year, despite uncertainty caused by the virus.
“I am working with our team on some contingency planning. We are not coming off our profitability goal for Q4 based on what we see,” Mr. Chai said in remarks obtained by The New York Times.
Some of the regions most affected by the virus, including Italy and China, are not major markets for Uber. But the company has seen a decrease in rides to and from airports, Mr. Chai said. The company is also expecting to lose commuter rides as more people work from home.
An Uber spokesman declined to comment on the remarks.
Mr. Chai’s message differed from that of Lyft’s chief financial officer, Brian Roberts, who said last week at a financial conference that the company was experiencing its strongest week to date.
“We believe people would be more likely to use ride share than a crowded bus or subway. On the negative side, less travel could lead to fewer high-value airport rides and there could just be less business activity overall,” JP Morgan analyst Doug Anmuth wrote in an investor note last week after Mr. Roberts’s comments.
A Lyft spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
New York auto show is moved to August.
The annual New York International Auto Show, scheduled to open in early April at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, has been rescheduled for August out of concerns about the coronavirus, its organizers said on Tuesday.
The show, which draws hundreds of thousands of people each year, is owned and operated by the Greater New York Automobile Dealers Association, led by Mark Schienberg. It was set to open for media days on April 8 and run through April 19. The new dates are to be Aug. 26 to Sept. 6.
“For 120 years, ‘the show must go on’ has been heavily embedded in our DNA,” Mr. Schienberg, the association president, said in a statement announcing the move. He added, “While the decision to move the show dates didn’t come easy, our top priority remains with the health and well-being” of those involved.
The decision was made after Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo over the weekend declared a state of emergency in New York.
This month, the organizers of the Geneva International Auto Show in Switzerland canceled their annual event, also because of the coronavirus concerns. The Beijing Auto Show, planned for late April, has also been postponed indefinitely.
The 2020 Detroit show, which is set for June and will focus largely on outdoor events and exhibits, has made no changes to its schedule.
A worker filling car at a service station in Qatif, a city on Saudi Arabia’s eastern coast.Credit...Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Saudi Arabia fires a new shot in its oil-price war with Russia.
The root of Monday’s financial market meltdown was the start of an oil-price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia over the weekend, when the Saudis slashed their prices after Russia refused to join the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries in production cuts.
On Tuesday, Saudi Aramco, the national oil company, said that it would produce 12.3 million barrels a day of crude oil in April, a significant jump from its average of 9.7 million barrels a day.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
Although it is not clear how much of this oil would come from storage, the company is likely to sharply increase production. Saudi officials have said that they need to sell more oil to compensate for lower prices, and Aramco is offering deep discounts on its oil to win over buyers.
The sudden upheaval in the oil markets may take months to assess, but the impact on the U.S. economy is bound to be considerable, especially in Texas and other states where oil drives much of the job market.
On Tuesday, Occidental Petroleum said it would slash its quarterly dividend and capital spending plan in response to the drop in oil prices.
Airlines are suspending service to Italy and cutting back elsewhere.
Several airlines on Tuesday announced the temporary suspension of all flights to and from Italy, a day after the country announced a nationwide lockdown to combat the coronavirus outbreak.
Spanish authorities barred all airlines from Spain, including Iberia and Vueling, from operating either inbound or outbound Italian flights, while British Airways announced the immediate suspension of flights until April 4 and Ryanair said that it would suspend all of its domestic flights in Italy and international flights to Italy.
Alitalia, Italy’s flagship carrier, said it would continue services but gave the passengers the option to rebook or reroute their flight free of charge.
Airlines in the United States also said on Tuesday that they were further slashing service and costs in response to the substantial decline in bookings caused by fear over the coronavirus.
Speaking at an investor conference on Tuesday, Ed Bastian, chief executive of Delta Air Lines, announced that the airline would cut domestic service by about 15 percent.
Here’s what else is happening.
On Tuesday, Google recommended that tens of thousands of its North American employees work from home. Previously, it had only extended that policy to workers in the Seattle area.
President Trump plans to meet with senior executives from the country’s biggest banks — including Goldman Sachs, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Citigroup and JPMorgan Chase — along with community bankers, at the White House on Wednesday.
The World Trade Organization on Tuesday suspended further meetings until March 20, after the confirmation that one of its staff members had contracted the virus.
The Washington Post’s publisher, Fred Ryan, said in a staff-wide memo Tuesday that the newspaper would be “encouraging (but not mandating)” working from home for the rest of the month. The Post has already canceled nonessential business travel through March.
The Los Angeles Times executive editor Norman Pearlstine said in a staff-wide memo Tuesday that all work-related flying was suspended except “in cases where it is absolutely required for the job.” Employees who do fly will be subject to 14-day work-from-home quarantines, he said. For others, working from home remains optional.
Reporting and research were contributed by Kate Conger, Jeanne Smialek, Alexandra Stevenson, Sheryl Gay Stolberg, Alan Rappeport, Jack Ewing, Stanley Reed, Michael Corkery, Kevin Granville, Tiffany Hsu, Kate Kelly, Matthew Goldstein, Brooks Barnes, Stephen Williams, Iliana Magra and Niraj Chokshi.
