Swiss crypto exchange, SMART VALOR, has just announced adding support for XRP trading.
The exchange is only about six months old, but it is fully regulated, safe, and legal, which puts it among the minority of other such services, according to its CEO.
With the addition of XRP, the exchange now offers 8 different cryptos, as well as support for four different fiat currencies.
for the third-largest cryptocurrency by market cap , XRP.
? #XRP trading is now live on @smartvalorinc allowing users to invest in a coin whose low-fee, real-time transactions are turning heads of traditional financial institutions worldwide !
— SMART VALOR (@smartvalorinc) January 31, 2020
created by a crypto startup, Ripple. The coin is used to fuel Ripple’s
world. With more and more financial institutions using XRP, the coin’s
exchanges are willing to list it.
new exchange, which was launched last year. Since then, it added support for
was listed only a few weeks ago, in early January 2020.
Apart from listing all of these cryptocurrencies , SMART VALOR also supports multiple fiat currencies , such as euros, US dollars, Swiss francs, and British pounds.
The exchange also stands out for being one of the very few firms of this type that managed to obtain all the necessary licenses and approvals to operate in the Swiss market. The company’s CEO, Olga Feldmeier, noted in last year’s interview that regulatory compliance in the crypto industry is extremely important.
majority of exchanges, people do not even know where they are. She mentioned a
report published by Bitwise for the US SEC, in which Bitwise noted that only
around 10 exchanges are fully regulatory compliant, safe, and legal.
Switzerland and Lichtenstein. Originally, it only listed BTC and ETH, but
recently, it started adding more and more coins, eventually resulting in a
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
