Major United States brokerage TD Ameritrade doesn’t deny the potential inclusion of cryptocurrencies like XRP to its platform.
Major United States brokerage TD Ameritrade doesn’t deny the potential inclusion of cryptocurrencies like XRP to its platform.
One of the early adopters of the original Bitcoin ( BTC ) futures trading platform, TD Ameritrade apparently remains positive about more potential initiatives in crypto.
In a Dec. 29 tweet , TD Ameritrade hinted that it is continuing to explore crypto markets, replying to a question as to whether the company is planning to support cryptocurrency such as XRP.
“Thank you for your interest! Currently, we offer Bitcoin Futures on the CME. We will continue to monitor the market and consider additional opportunities going forward.”
Contacted by Cointelegraph on Dec. 30, a spokesperson at TD Ameritrade hasn’t revealed more details about the potential inclusion of XRP, only noting that new products and services will be added based on feedback from clients. The representative said:
The news comes after TD Ameritrade was acquired by investment brokerage giant Charles Schwab in late November 2019 in an all-stock deal valued at $26 billion. As officially announced by Schwab, the acquisition created a company of $5 trillion in assets under management.
Following the acquisition, TD Ameritrade- backed cryptocurrency exchange ErisX launched its own physically-settled Bitcoin futures contracts on Dec. 17, 2019. By launching the product, the firm allowed investors to receive real cryptocurrency and not the cash equivalent for trading.
TD Ameritrade has already hinted about the potential addition of XRP back in December 2018. The company tweeted at the time:
“We’re still exploring the #XRP space — stay tuned for more information. Our team is working hard to make things like this happen.”
In July 2019, TD Ameritrade CEO and president Tim Hockey said that digital currencies have again become a subject of increased interest from investors and traders. According to the executive, renewed interest in crypto was driven by Facebook’s stablecoin project Libra as well as Bitcoin surging above $13,000 in a crypto rally in June 2019.
Additionally, Hockey revealed at the time that he plans to step down from his CEO position but will remain the top executive until February 2020.
