The cheapest apartments for rent in Broad Ripple, Indianapolis
Broad Ripple is very walkable, is convenient for biking and has a few nearby public transportation options, according to Walk Score's rating system .
So what does the low-end rent on a rental in Broad Ripple look like these days — and what might you get for the price?
We took a look at local listings in Broad Ripple via rental sites Zumper and Apartment Guide to find out what budget-minded apartment seekers can expect to find in this Indianapolis neighborhood.
Take a look at the cheapest listings available right now, below. (Note: Prices and availability are subject to change.)
Hoodline offers data-driven analysis of local happenings and trends across cities. Links included in this article may earn Hoodline a commission on clicks and transactions.
Listed at $950/month, this 796-square-foot two-bedroom, one-bathroom apartment is located at 5910 Carrollton Ave.
The apartment comes with hardwood flooring and central heating. Pet owners, take heed: This rental is both dog-friendly and cat-friendly. The listing specifies a $950 security deposit.
This two-bedroom, one-bathroom dwelling, situated at 6184 Carvel Ave., is listed for $1,200/month for its 1,000 square feet.
In the unit, anticipate hardwood flooring, a deck and central heating and air conditioning. Amenities offered in the building include on-site laundry. Pet lovers are in luck: This rental is both dog-friendly and cat-friendly.
Then there's this 1,830-square-foot dwelling with two bedrooms and one bathroom at 6163 Norwaldo Ave., listed at $1,450/month.
The residence comes with hardwood flooring and a deck. Pets are not welcome. Building amenities include garage parking, outdoor space and additional storage space. Future tenants needn't worry about a leasing fee.
This story was created automatically using local real estate data from Zumper and Apartment Guide , then reviewed by an editor. Click here for more about what we're doing. Additionally, if you’re an agent or a broker, read on for real estate marketing ideas to promote your local listing.
Got thoughts? Go here to share your feedback.
