This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
British travel company Thomas Cook’s sudden decision to end operations early Monday sent hundreds of thousands of travelers scurrying for new options. It also caused a major ripple effect in the stock market, as investors look for opportunities for Thomas Cook’s competitors and worry about further fallout from the company’s downfall.
Thomas Cook (ticker: TCKGY) has blamed its misfortune on a hot summer that deterred travelers, uncertainty caused by Brexit, and the weak British pound that made overseas vacations relatively more expensive. All of those factors could presumably also hurt other companies involved in the European vacation business. But on Monday the market was treating Thomas Cook’s demise as a good thing for others in the business. The company served about 19 million people a year, so its bankruptcy creates opportunities for rivals to pick up market share.
Among the biggest beneficiaries is TUI ( TUI FY), a German company that sells package deals similar to Thomas Cook. TUI was up 6.8% Monday afternoon. The debt market clearly isn’t as worried about TUI as it was about Thomas Cook, said Mark Benbow, co-manager of the Kames High Yield Bond Fund. TUI’s debt is rated about five notches higher than Thomas Cook’s, he said. “They’re not running quite as close to the wind,” he said. “Same business model, less debt. They’re more in control of their own destiny.”
Another company with a similar business model to Thomas Cook is Dart Group (DRGTF), which owns low-cost airline Jet2.com and a package-vacation business. Its stock was up 4.1% on Monday. Competition from Dart was likely a precipitating factor behind Thomas Cook’s failure, said Meryl Witmer, general partner at Eagle Capital Partners in New York; the firm has a large position in the stock.
“I think it’s very good for TUI and for Dart,” she said. “Thomas Cook was 20% of that [package] market, that’s a big number, so that capacity is out of the market.”
The change is already being felt in airfares, Witmer said. Prices for flights on Oct. 10 have doubled, and flights a little longer out are up 20% to 30%, she noted. Many flights are fully booked. Ryanair (RYAAY) and other low-cost fliers were also rising on the news.
“I think they’re looking forward to reporting much better numbers than they thought. They have a large, somewhat irrational competitor now out of the market in terms of competing for flights and packages,” Witmer said.
Dart and TUI also had to compete with Thomas Cook to reserve hotel rooms in advance for their package tours and now will likely get better deals from hotels. “That was getting expensive, particularly in Spain,” she noted.
Cruise lines that appeal to budget-minded consumers could also benefit, Wells Fargo analyst Timothy Conder argued.
SEE ALSO: Carnival Cruises to See Modest Benefit After Collapse of Thomas Cook, Analysts Say
“The near-term disruption from the liquidation of Thomas Cook’s tour/hotel operations should result in U.K./Continental European budget consumers looking to vacation/holiday options from stable operators,” he wrote.
Among the companies that could take advantage are Carnival (CCL), Norwegian Cruise Line Holdings (NCLH), and Royal Caribbean Cruises (RCL). All three stocks were actually down slightly on Monday.
British travel company Thomas Cook’s sudden decision to end operations early Monday sent hundreds of thousands of travelers scurrying for new options.
