Top 5 Potentially Profitable Cryptocurrencies in 2020: Investment Advice
The main goal for any investor is to make money from buying and selling different assets.
Cryptocurrency is a potentially great digital asset for investment. Some cryptocurrencies have better options for investment in 2020. Do you want to know what digital currencies are worth investing your money in the next 12 months? Read the following recommendations.
Despite the international trend of cryptocurrency devaluation in 2019, some coins still possess a very good potential for making quick and long-term ROI. Do not pay attention only to the current rate of cryptocurrencies because this index is the most volatile and may change drastically within a few weeks (take, for instance, the dramatic drop of Bitcoin price in 2018). On the contrary, consider the following factors and indicators:
Market capitalization – the value of all issued digital coins of the particular cryptocurrency. High market cap means a large volume of the crypto coins participating in active transactions, which means an enhanced interest of investors;
Liquidity level – the higher it is, the faster a cryptocurrency can be sold at the market price. The most popular cryptocurrencies – Ethereum, Bitcoin and Ripple – have a high liquidity rate. Trading activity on exchanges indicates the number of transactions with certain cryptos made over a certain period. This indicator shows an actual demand in particular cryptocurrencies among traders;
Check the current top 10 cryptocurrencies with the highest market cap (January 28, 2020):
According to AMarkets expert Artem Deev, the following recommendations will help to minimize risks and increase ROI for cryptocurrency investors this year:
Diversify your investments – never invest money in one asset. New traders and investors make this mistake repeatedly and, as a result, lose all money after the first failing deal. Diversify your investment portfolio. At least one of the chosen cryptocurrencies will bring profits and you will be able to minimize losses;
Do not blindly trust one source of data – always use a few sources (chats, forums, expert opinion, financial analysis, brokers);
Learn and observe – it is the only way to pick the best cryptocurrencies and the entry point to this extremely volatile market;
Top 5 cryptocurrencies to invest in 2020:
In May 2020, the first and major cryptocurrency developers will offer 50% reduced rewards – 6.25 BTC instead of 12.5 BTC for each verified block. However, apart from that, Bitcoin is likely to bring the dominance index to 65-70% compared to other altcoins. In such a way, it can become the cryptocurrency with the largest market capitalization. These factors may significantly affect the growth of its price in 2020. Active use of Lightning Network may also change the BTC ecosystem. It will enable the implementation of Bitcoin in decentralized applications, micropayments, and e-commerce platforms. The current Bitcoin price (January 28, 2020) is $8 994,85.
Unlike Bitcoin, Ethereum is based on practical smart contracts used by many projects for the digitalization of transactions. The currency value may increase due to the increasing demand for its blockchain and functions, rather than a deficit of the asset as it happens with BTC right now. A major role in the success or failure of this currency will depend on upcoming fork updates and rapid implementation of the Proof-of-Stake algorithm. The approval by regulatory organizations and community decision to de-list ETH from the list of altcoins may also affect its price growth in 2020. The current ETH price is $171,38.
The NEO project is often included in different cryptocurrency investment ratings for the next year. This cryptocurrency breaks many stereotypes, including being the first open-source token originated from China. It claims to transform the traditional financial system by combining digital and real assets. Its unique Superconduct trading mechanism allows users to trust the funds through a decentralized platform. So, NEO’s appliance is beyond doubt, as its rapid demand growth. NEO may even hold an ICO, but so far it is trading at the level of $11,14 USD per token. The current NEO price is $11,14.
Chinese experts, according to CoinTelegraph , really like to include EOS to the list of the most promising cryptocurrencies for the next few years. Even if you don’t know much about crypto coins, it is definitely worth your investment in 2020. If Twitter, Uber, and Amazon ever move to a blockchain, the core of their work will definitely be EOS. The EOS system is free of Ethereum problems with scalability and it is ready to replace other competitive blockchains. If Ethereum fails, EOS can level up to 100 USD per token. EOS achievements become possible thanks to the consensus algorithm of delegated proof of ownership (DPoS) and an infinite number of similar blockchains. The current EOS price is $3,94.
Some experts call XRP the “king of banking infrastructure”. The successful partnership with major financial market players made the Ripple ecosystem a breakthrough in the crypto industry. Take the latest integration with Western Union and the potential replacement of SWIFT to accelerate and reduce the cost of large money transfers between counterparties. However, do not expect huge profits with XRP in 2020, it is good for long-term investment. Even with the most optimistic approach, XRP price is unlikely to rise above 0.7 USD in the next couple of years. The current XRP price is $0,233759.
Besides the obvious choices of popular cryptocurrencies, one of AMarkets experts – Basil Gamov – recommends to take a closer look at cheap but potentially great cryptocurrencies to invest in the next 12 months:
1) Chainlink (LINK) – appeared in 2017 in the USA. These crypto coins developed a technology that forms channels between different data providers employing smart blockchain technology. Chainlink allows all network operators, like information providers, to earn their token LINK. From an investment point of view, Chainlink has great potential. This is the list of partners who also believe in this crypto coin’s future: Dapps Inc, Google Cloud, ETHA, ConsenSys. The price (January 28, 2020) is $2,62. The market cap is $917 350 826.
2) Basic Attention Token (BAT) is another functional type of tokens based on the Ethereum blockchain. It is used only in the Brave browser. The cryptocurrency was launched in 2015. Developers offer a various concept of interaction for all network participants. Browser users pick to choose ads or not and can monitor the token’s price in real-time via Brave. The token has a very active and massive affiliate program, has the support of the Tor browser and DuckDuckGo search engine. The current token price is $0,218456. The market cap is $311 019 624.
3) Synthetix Network Token (SNX) is a potentially interesting platform network based on the ERC20 token. It helps to create synthetic assets (Synths) for tracking the value of physical assets. People can create and support their Synths and make money with them, without actually being the owners of these assets. The token appeared in 2017 and back then it was called Havven. The current token price is $1,19. The market cap is $193 220 205.
Sure, you are free to pick any cryptocurrency to invest in 2020. Remember to diversify and work with reliable exchange services and brokers to protect your investment deals from any fraud. Make sure to include crypto coins into your asset portfolio as soon as possible while top currencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum are still hot for investment.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
