Bitcoin Investor Brock Pierce Announces 2020 Presidential Run, Promises Stimulus Check Overhaul
PlusToken, a Ponzi scheme that swept China and Korea over the last few years, saw around $2 billion worth of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies stolen from investors.
Last Saturday, ahead of the traditional market rout caused by Opec, PlusToken scammers moved a little over $100 million worth of bitcoin to so-called mixers, designed to disguise the origin and destination of the coins.
The fraudsters may have then sold off the bitcoins, causing prices to fall as supply flooded the market, according to Singhal.
The bitcoin price fell by almost $1,000 per bitcoin on Saturday, before stock markets and other assets crashed.
"PlusToken scam moved another 13,000 bitcoin's yesterday," bitcoin and cryptocurrency analyst Kevin Svenson said via Twitter on Sunday.
"They also did something similar after bitcoin crossed above $10,000 this year. They are slamming the market with sell orders. Essentially we have a giant whale unloading after every move up."
When trading volumes are low the market is more susceptible to manipulation by big traders.
The bitcoin price has lost around 20% over the last month, all but destroying the narrative that ... [+] bitcoin had begun performing as a so-called safe-haven asset.
Many have taken the latest fall in the bitcoin price as proof it is failing to act as a so-called safe-haven—an idea that had gained popularity in recent months as bitcoin rose in the face of escalating U.S. and Iran tensions and then apparently gaining on fears the coronavirus could knock global trade .
Traditional safe-haven assets, such as gold and the Japanese yen, usually move higher in times of greater risk and uncertainty.
"Bitcoin is down 8% in the last day, much more than global equities," economist and outspoken bitcoin critic, Nouriel Roubini, said on Sunday night via Twitter .
"Another proof that bitcoin is not a good hedge versus risky assets in risk-off episodes. It actually falls more than risky assets during risk-off."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
