We feature the top brokers and exchanges that offer the option to buy Ripple (XRP) with a credit card or debit card. For larger sums you can also send a wire transfer. We list exchanges and services based on personal experience, and reputation. Please view the risks associated with bitcoin and cryptocurrency trading at the bottom of this page. Also access our affiliate disclaimer .
Binance – Referral ID: EE59L0QP for 10% cashback on all trading fees.
Processing is offered by Simplex, a fully licensed and regulated electronic money institution in the EU, providing the leading fiat infrastructure and payment processing solution to over 130 cryptocurrency ecosystem leaders.
Founded in 2018, Binance has quickly become the most popular cryptocurrency exchange in the world. Once you have Ripple you can easily exchange for 100s of other tokens listed on the platform.
KuCoin – Top VIP Program.
Processing is offered by Simplex, a fully licensed and regulated electronic money institution in the EU, providing the leading fiat infrastructure and payment processing solution to over 130 cryptocurrency ecosystem leaders.
Once BTC is purchased you can trade for 100s of other tokens on this popular exchange.
Coinmama – Established in 2013. Over 2,100,000 people across 188 countries have purchased bitcoin here.
Buy XRP with a credit card, debit card, or wire transfer.
Coinmama does not offer a Ripple wallet, you cannot store your XRP here, this is simply to purchase tokens. You may need a wallet or to transfer the tokens to an exchange such as Binance , Kucoin or Bittrex .
Buy with Visa debit or Mastercard, USD wire transfer or cryptocurrency. This is one of the most popular crypto exchanges in the world.
Once you have purchased XRP you can exchange with 100s of other tokens.
XRP is a popular, open-source, cryptocurrency, which boasts attributes such as fast settlement times and a fixed supply.
XRP is most commonly associated with Ripple Labs, as this U.S. based company controls a majority of the 100 billion XRP tokens in existence.
Due to the percentage of XRP help by Ripple Labs, a complex relationship has evolved, over time.  This has resulted in much confusion when differentiating between XRP and Ripple Labs.
XRP is typically viewed as a ‘bridging currency’.  This means it can be used as an intermediary, facilitating the exchange of currencies.  It is also able to make fast and cheap international payments a reality.
Underpinning XRP is not one of the commonly used POW of POS protocols.  Rather, XRP utilizes a consensus system, comprised of anyone that desires to run an XRP node.  Despite Ripple Labs controlling the majority supply of XRP, the ability for anyone to set up a node gives credence to the argument that the cryptocurrency is indeed, decentralized.
Nodes on the network are responsible for verifying the validity and time-based order of transactions taking place.  Agreement between nodes on this data occurs in under 5 seconds.
Due to regulatory concerns over the status of XRP, as a security, projected growth of the cryptocurrency is difficult to pin down.  While there will, no doubt, continue to be development of services utilizing XRP, growth be kept in check while its status remains in limbo.
If determined a security, the road ahead will be tough for XRP.  If cleared of this designation, and adoption of the cryptocurrency is seen among world banks, XRP looks to have a bright future.
Un-phased by the uncertainty of classification, Ripple has indicated and shown a propensity for continued development of their platform, and product adoption.
To date, it appears as though the ideologies which drive Ripple labs are not to overthrow traditional banking systems, but to help them evolve.
To help them evolve, Ripple Labs has been working hand-in-hand with banks, for years now; essentially counting on the transition of banks, rather than the complete replacement of our current system.
Ripple has done well to achieve modest adoption of XRP, in recent years.  Various banks, and forward thinking companies, have run programs trialing the usage of this cryptocurrency.
Alongside this acceptance, there are two main controversies which have continued to plague XRP over the years.
Manipulation – While this has not been proven to be the case, there are many that believe Ripple Labs manipulates the supply of XRP available to the public, in an effort to suit their own needs.
Clientele – Many proponents in the world of cryptocurrencies are in it to build a world not reliant upon traditional banks. Ripple Labs, however, has gone down a path that would see them serve the very institutions that Bitcoin was built to circumvent.  While many are not swayed by this argument, there are those that do not support Ripple Labs and XRP, simply based upon their goals.
Ripple Labs and XRP find themselves in a state of disarray, with regards to regulation.  While they remain steadfast in their belief that XRP is not a security, there are those that believe otherwise.  This has resulted in on-going lawsuits arguing this point.
To date, there is no definitive answer on the classification of XRP.
There is a very high degree of risk involved in trading securities, and this trading risk is  higher with Cryptocurrencies such as XRP due to markets being decentralized and non-regulated. There is no central bank that can take corrective measure to protect the value of Cryptocurrencies in a crisis or issue more currency. You should be aware that you may lose a significant portion of your portfolio.
Securities.io is not a registered broker, analyst, or investment advisor.
All information contained herein should be independently verified and confirmed. We do not accept any liability for any loss or damage whatsoever caused in reliance upon such information or services. Please be aware of the risks involved with any trading done in any financial market. Do not trade with money that you cannot afford to lose. When in doubt, you should consult a qualified financial advisor before making any investment decisions.
Some of the links in this website either through images, text, audio or video are affiliate links. This means if you click on the link and purchase the item or use the service, the owner of this website will receive an affiliate commission.
To learn more visit our affiliate disclosure page.
