Home » Cryptocurrency » Will XRP Price Surge in August This Year Due to Intense Usage in Tokyo Olympics?
Will XRP Price Surge in August This Year Due to Intense Usage in Tokyo Olympics?
With the 2020 Olympics taking place in Tokyo, Japan, a lot of people will visit the crypto-friendly nation where they will be able to pay with XRP, which might boost the coin's usage.
With XRP being one of the coins that the platform is covering, and the platform itself being quite reputable and trustworthy, these partnerships are guaranteed to persist.
Crypto firms and financial institutions around the world are employing this platform's blockchain analytics for meeting regulatory compliance and risk management.
2020 is expected to be a big year for cryptocurrencies , and for a number of reasons. Predictions regarding Bitcoin surge have already been making headlines for weeks, if not months. However, many predict that altcoins will also explode for their own reasons throughout the year, especially when it comes to XRP.
Ripple’s partners. Among them was Tomoyuki Nii, the Executive Officer for
Overseas Investment at SBI Investment.
He stated that “At the Tokyo Olympics, a lot
of people will come to Japan. They will be shopping and traveling around and
they will be able to use XRP in a secure way, protected by a platform like
As many likely know, Ripple , the crypto startup that has developed XRP, has been making deals with banks around the world, offering its payment processing system that uses XRP. Thanks to the ability to perform instant payments even when it comes to international transactions, banks from around the world have been attracted to Ripple products.
Banks in Japan have been massively adopting XRP as a result, as it was reported by many news outlets back in December 2019.
hosting the Olympics in 2020, as mentioned by Tomoyuki Nii. With an event as
to the island nation, and a fair number of them are likely to be crypto users.
use the opportunity and try making payments via cryptocurrencies. And, as
mentioned, XRP is becoming rather big in Japan, which means that the majority
of crypto payments are likely to use this particular altcoin.
and cheaper, but it is also much safer, as Tomoyuki Nii also pointed out. The
as tourists will stream into the country, and the demand for crypto will
to show the simplicity and speed of crypto trading, as well.
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
