The stock market has been remarkably resilient this year amid the pandemic and recession. But the Dow's massive 1,800-point plunge on June 11 should serve as a reminder that equities remain risky.
And some are much riskier than others.
Every investor wants to buy "when there's blood in the streets." The hard part is making sure it's not your blood.
To be sure, there is no shortage of stocks for which a bear case can be made. Some of these stocks could very well be beaten-down bargains. Others, not so much.
To get a sense of where the traps might lie, we searched the S&P 500 for stocks with the lowest average analyst recommendations. Furthermore, because analysts are so reluctant to issue Sell recommendations, we homed in on stocks with a comparatively high number of these bearish calls.
Lastly, we dug into research and fundamentals. After applying our criteria, we found stocks to sell among retailers, consumer staples, energy, financials and even the odd utility. But five names looked particularly risky.
Have a look at these five troubled stocks, which have some of the lowest average analyst ratings in the S&P 500. If you're looking for stocks to sell or avoid, these would be worthy candidates.
Western Union ( WU , $22.50) is clawing its way back after the pandemic gutted remittances volume earlier this year, but the money transfer firm's problems go beyond COVID-19.
The recession is troubling enough. But more worrisome is fierce competition in the financial technology industry. Speculation has it that Western Union will make a play for MoneyGram ( MGI ), but bears say that tie-up wouldn't be sufficient to fight off rivals such as TransferWise, Remitly and Xoom, which is backed by PayPal ( PYPL ).
Diamond Hill Capital, for one, doubts a merger would move the strategic needle for WU.
"We remain skeptical of the company's ability to deliver sustained, long-term revenue growth given competitive pressures we see in the core money transfer business, namely threats from various digital solutions and new entrants," says Diamond Hill, an investment manager with more than $20 billion in assets under management.
A single analyst rates WU at Strong Buy, while 14 have it at Hold. Most noticeable is that seven analysts have Western Union among their stocks to sell, given how rarely Wall Street issues Sell calls.
Investors who are being greedy when others are fearful of airline stocks are making a bold but risky bet. Analysts are particularly concerned about American Airlines ( AAL , $14.38), which is burning through $40 million in cash a day - less than the $100 million per day it logged in April, but still worrisome - and looks to have an unsustainable valuation.
American Airlines said in early June that it's planning to fly 55% of its domestic schedule and about 20% of its international schedule in July. That would represent only 40% of its year-over-year system-wide capacity.
"We don't believe anyone's view on AAL stock fundamentally changed as a result of any news," says Credit Suisse, which rates the stock at Underperform (Sell). "Let us not lose sight of AAL's ~40B debt load ... that the company will need to dig out of, and our expectation that (earnings per share) will remain negative next year, weighed down by the heavy interest burden."
Just look at expectations for the broader industry. The International Air Transport Association projects airline industry losses of $84.3 billion this year. The trade group expects revenue to drop 50%. IATA predicts another $15.8 billion in losses for the wider industry next year.
Three analysts recommend swinging for the fences, rating AAL at Strong Buy. However, seven say Hold, five call it a Sell and four caution the stock is a Strong Sell.
