Dow Jones Futures: Stocks Soar As Trump Clarifies US-China Trade Deal; Traders Weigh S&P 500 Bets
The Dow Jones futures are trading higher as traders seek to move past the risk aversion event that jolted the US futures and Asian markets after unclear remarks from Trump Advisor, Peter Navarro. President Trump took matters in his own hands and assured the stock market that the trade deal with China is “fully intact”. Investors are showing little to no concern about rising Covid-19 case counts in the US even though the coronavirus virus is spreading at an alarming rate in Texas.
Both the S&P 500 and Dow Jones futures are maintaining their gains. Meanwhile, geopolitical tensions continue to simmer in the background as the Trump administration puts further restrictions on four Chinese state media outlets. In retaliation, China has halted its poultry purchase from a Tyson plant. So far, the reasoning behind the tension is still mainly due to coronavirus. But the fear is that the phase one trade deal between the US-China could be in jeopardy, especially if Trump presses the matter.
The global stock market is likely to remain fragile risk-takers are uncomfortable with so many moving parts, as countries reopen their economies and lift travel restrictions. Investors will be watching the new growth projections by the IMF that are due tomorrow, and there is very little optimism for this event. The market breadth of the S&P 500 maintains its bull momentum. Gold prices are trading with modest losses, but the upward trend is still intact for the precious metal. Both WTI and Brent oil prices are above the critical price level of $40, and this is likely to bring additional US shale oil production into the market.
Here is more on these topics:
NEW YORK, NEW YORK - MAY 26: The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) stands in lower Manhattan on the ... [+] first day that traders are allowed back onto the historic floor of the exchange on May 26, 2020 in New York City. While only a small number of traders will be returning at this time, those that do will have to take temperature checks and wear face masks at all times while on the floor. The Dow rose over 600 points in morning trading as investors see economic activity in America picking up (Photo by Spencer Platt/Getty Images)
The Dow Jones futures are trading higher by 160 points. Still, the DJIA index is likely to face a wild day and remain vulnerable because investors are less hopeful about a V-shape recovery. However, the US economy is still opening up gradually, which should continue to bolster the economic sentiment and provide more support for the equity markets.
The daily chart for the Dow Jones index confirms that the Dow still lacks some momentum because the Dow futures are trading below the 200-day moving average. If the Dow stocks fail to push the trend upwards, bearish sentiment in the stock market could drag the Dow Jones below its 50-day moving average. If this becomes a reality, then it is likely the Dow will revisit the coronavirus stock market low.
The DJIA index has challenged its 100-week moving average on a weekly time frame, and this is a positive sign. If the Dow Jones moves above this average, we have a strong hope for a new upward trend.
The S&P 500 futures, which show a better representation of the overall stock market, continue to confirm the bull momentum is intact as the S&P 500 index trades above all the important 50, 100 and 200-day SMA on the daily chart.
DJIA chart. Dow Jones futures show some sign of strength as the price has challenged 100-week moving ... [+] average. The Dow could gain momntum and stock market may rally
The US stock market rally closed in positive territory yesterday, with the tech sector primarily leading the gains. The VIX futures’ July contract exploded overnight and surged more than 3% as traders became highly concerned about the US and China trade deal. This move confirms a critical factor. If threats continue to assault the US and China trade deal, traders may hedge their bets by looking at this particular asset. In simple terms, a drop in the US stock markets is likely to push volatility higher, and the July contract for the VIX futures represents a potential hedge.
VIX Index. The volatility chart for the S&P 500 index shows that traders are highly sensitive to US ... [+] and China phase one trade deal.
The S&P500 index closed higher by scoring gains of 0.65%, and the Dow Jones industrial average jumped by 0.59% yesterday. Information technology stocks led the gains of the S&P 500 index and 7 out of 11 sectors closed in positive territory. American Airlines
stock was the biggest drag on the S&P 500 index. The S&P 500 is trading 8.12% below its 52-week high that formed on February 19, 2020, and 42.2% above its Covid-19 low reached on March 23, 2020.
