Bear markets of the past do provide a roadmap of sorts for the types of declines investors can expect. The S&P 500, at its bear market closing low Monday, was 29.5% below its record high.
In the last bear market during the financial crisis and Great Recession, the market fell by nearly 57%.
So how does that compare with other bears? The average bear market loss since 1929 is 40% and lasts 21 months, according to S&P Dow Jones Indices. It turns out that bear markets that occur during recessions (which many on Wall Street are calling for now due to coronavirus business stoppages) tend to be deeper (the average pullback is 37%) than ones that don’t involve recessions (24% decline), says Ryan Detrick, senior market strategist at LPL Financial.
Levels at which stock market indexes like the S&P 500 stopped going down in past market routs are often viewed as a floor – or support – for future market meltdowns like we’re seeing now.
“Technical” analysts look at stock charts and draw long-term trend lines, or lines in the sand where selling stopped in the past. If those old support levels “hold,” there’s a good chance buyers will find that comforting. They'll view that level as a good entry point to buy stocks, stabilizing prices.
So, what key levels should investors be watching now?
Remember the Christmas Eve massacre on Wall Street in 2018? Well, stocks in the S&P 500 stopped going down that day when the large-company stock index closed at 2,351. That’s the level Wall Street pros are watching closely now. After Wednesday's drop, the S&P 500 is trading about 2% above that level.
“We’re rapidly approaching key chart support near 2,350,” says Mark Arbeter, president of Arbeter Investments.
The good news? Despite dipping briefly below that key level, the S&P 500 was able to stay close above that key level, despite sinking as low as 2280.
What’s the next support level after that? Chris Verrone of Strategas Research Partners says “there’s a cluster of very long-term support in the 2,150 to 2,350 zone.”
If the stock market dive worsens, there will come a point where Wall Street decides that stocks have become so cheap that they’ve become a screaming buy.  And when professional traders sense a huge buying opportunity, the market often can shoot up higher fast and furious, often causing investors who had fled to the sidelines to miss out.
We may be getting close to the idea that “stocks are on sale,” but we’re not quite there yet.
After Monday’s plunge, the market’s price-to-earnings ratio based on 2020 earnings estimates of $169 had fallen to 14.2. That compares to the 14.1 P-E during the near-bear market in December 2018, says Lindsey Bell, chief investment strategist at Ally Invest.
The problem is earnings estimates are likely to come down as the true impact on profitability caused by the coronavirus becomes better known.
“The market could follow that move lower in earnings,” says Bell, adding that the market bottomed in 2008 at 10 times earnings. Similarly, a valuation analysis looking at median P-E levels going back to 1957 done by Phil Segner at The Leuthold Group found that the market is still 4% overvalued.
Once every investor on earth thinks the world is ending, and pessimism is at a peak, most of the people who wanted to sell already have. That clears the way for buyers to swoop in and pick up bargain-bin-priced stocks.
One sentiment indicator to watch is the survey of bulls and bears by the American Association of Individual Investors.
Back on March 5, 2009, four days before the bear market bottom, more than 70% of AAII members polled said they were “bearish” on the market. In the latest weekly survey published on March 19, there were 51.3% bears, versus the historical average of 30.5. And when the next survey is released, it’s likely that bearishness will again show historical extremes.
The bottom line: Keep your eyes peeled for signs of a market bottom.
One more thing. Here’s a simple clue that will suggest that the worst of the selling is over: Bad news no longer sparks a massive sell-off.
When bad news is again good news for stocks, a rebound rally won’t be far away.
