This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
European Stocks Fall as U.S. Takes a Holiday Amid Climbing Covid-19 Cases
Updated July 3, 2020 9:50 am ET / Original July 3, 2020 6:44 am ET
Markers encourage proper social distancing on Santa Monica Pier amid the Covid-19 pandemic on July 2, 2020, in California.
European stocks fell Friday and were set to break a four-session win streak, with upbeat economic data overshadowed by persistent worries about rising virus cases in the U.S. That is as a holiday Stateside was set to keep a lid on trading volumes.
The Stoxx Europe 600 index fell 0.6% to 366.03, on the heels of a near 2% gain on Thursday. For the week, the index is set for a 2.1% gain. Elsewhere, the German DAX 30 fell 0.4%, the French CAC 40 dropped 0.8% and the FTSE 100 slid 1%. Spain’s IBEX 35 stood out with a 1% decline.
Stocks rallied in Asia, though, with China’s CSI 300 index closing up 1% and nearly 7% for the week. Investors were inspired by Wall Street gains on Thursday, and data showing China’s June Caixin services purchasing managers index rose to the highest level in more than a decade.
Equity markets are closed in the U.S. on Friday to observe the Independence Day holiday . But Dow and S&P 500 futures reflected losses of 0.2% to 0.3%, while Nasdaq-100 futures rose modestly. Technology stocks logged another record on Thursday.
Optimism about the latest U.S. jobs gains was tempered by concerns about the spreading coronavirus in that country, and after Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin said he wanted to wait for additional economic data before moving forward with another relief package.
Also drawing attention, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said in an interview with the Journal of the American Medical Association on Thursday that the virus may be mutating to become more transmissible, with high viral loads.
“We don’t have a connection between whether an individual does worse with this or not. It just seems that the virus replicates better and may be more transmissible. But this is still at the stage of trying to confirm that,” said Fauci.
Elsewhere, data showed the euro-area Market Services PMI for June came in at 48.3, jumping from May’s 30.5 and beating a forecast of 47.3. Dramatic gains were seen in Spain, where the services PMI jumped to 50.2 from 27.9. The eurozone June Composite PMI was 48.5, from 31.9 in May.
Banks and energy shares were weighing on the downside, with HSBC Holdings and BNP Paribas down 2% each. Shares of BP and Royal Dutch Shell stock also lost 2% each, as oil prices came under pressure.
Among stocks on the move, shares of Delivery Hero jumped nearly 5% on a positive trading update. The delivery platform said order numbers for the group in the second quarter jumped 94% from a year ago. Final numbers will be released on July 28.
European Stocks Fall as U.S. Takes a Holiday Amid Climbing Covid-19 Cases
European stocks fell Friday and were set to break a four-session win streak, with upbeat economic data overshadowed by persistent worries about rising virus cases in the U.
