Fox News aired a graphic showing S&P 500 gains in the week following the death of high-profile black men.
The graphic showed gains after the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr, after the police shooting of teenager Michael Brown, when the police that beat Rodney King were acquitted, and after the recent death of George Floyd.
A Fox News spokesperson earlier pointed Business Insider to coverage of how the stock market reacts to such events in other media outlets, including Fortune and The Wall Street Journal.
Stocks often rise in times of upheaval and uncertainty, and they did so during the height of US coronavirus unemployment.
The graphic showed that the S&P 500, which tracks the performance of the biggest companies in the US, had improved in performance after civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in 1968.
It also pointed to gains following the death of George Floyd on May 25 . Floyd was killed after a white Minneapolis police officer kneeled on his neck for nearly nine minutes while taking him into custody.
A Fox News spokesperson told Business Insider on Saturday: "The infographic used on FOX News Channel's Special Report to illustrate market reactions to historic periods of civil unrest should have never aired on television without full context."
Hundreds of demonstrators march toward Lafayette Park and the White House to protest against police brutality and the death of George Floyd, on June 2, 2020 in Washington, DC.
The graphic shows "percentage change" one week after the event.
"Historically, there has been a disconnect between what investors focus on and what happens across the rest of the country," the reporter said, before pointing to the gains made after the other black men were killed.
Floyd's death has sparked protests across the country, renewing calls to end police brutality and tackle wider racism. The graphic was shown during Fox News' news coverage, rather than one of its commentary shows.
Rep. Bobby L. Rush, a Democrat in Illinois, had criticized the graphic late on Friday, saying "This is absolutely outrageous and disgusting. This graphic tells every single @FoxNews viewer that Black lives can be exchanged for market gain."
A Fox News spokeswoman earlier pointed Business Insider to coverage of the behavior of the stock market in light of these events and other moments of upheaval in other media publications, including Fortune , Bloomberg, and CNBC .
Many of these reports were offered as part of a larger explanation of how the stock market behaves in during such events than in the explanation Fox News gave during its broadcast.
The improvement in stock performance during a time of major upheaval is not unusual.
The Wall Street Journal reported that the 4.9% rise in the week leading up to June 5, which was dominated by intense protests, is "typical" during times of unrest and uncertainty.
