Goldman    Sachs expects the S&P    500 to close the year 2% higher, but not before enduring an    18% plunge over the next three months.
The stock market's recent leap from late-March lows is    best attributed to investors' "fear of missing out," the team    of analysts led by David Kostin wrote on Friday.
The S&P 500's lofty valuation faces several    near-term threats before economic stabilization in the third    quarter pushes it higher, the firm added.
Listed below are the six risks Goldman says investors    are overlooking. The firm thinks these will be responsible for    pushing US stocks lower over the next three months.
Several factors stand to pull the S&P  500 lower before it rises into year-end, Goldman  Sachs analysts said on Friday.
The bank sees the benchmark index closing the year at 3,000 -  roughly 2% higher than its Friday close of 2,930 - as the  coronavirus threat fades and the economy rebounds. But Goldman's  forecast also reflects an 18% downside to its three-month target,  with looming threats dragging the benchmark index to 2,400 by the  end of the summer.
"A single catalyst may not spark a pullback, but a number of  concerns and risks exist that we believe, and our client  discussions confirm, investors are downplaying," a team led by  David Kostin, the chief US equity strategist, wrote in a client  note.
The stock market's recent surge from late-March lows is best  attributed to a "fear of missing out" attitude among investors,  and skepticism about the rally's strength remains, Goldman added.
Listed below are the six risks Goldman says investors are  overlooking. The firm thinks these will be responsible for  pushing US stocks lower over the next three months as they become  fully realized.
While New York has seen positive results from its widespread  efforts to contain the coronavirus outbreak, several other outbreaks throughout the US are just beginning .  New infections across much of the US have increased, suggesting  the quick rebounds seen in Germany and China won't come easily.
Infection rates could increase even more as states reopen their  economies. Without a vaccine, a prolonged nationwide outbreak is  likely to quash indexes' weeks-long rally, the analysts wrote.
Goldman cited a recent call from Idex Corp. while forecasting a  drawn-out rebound. The manufacturing giant said it expected that  the US upswing would come with "fits and starts," adding that  expectations of a full recovery by the fall were "crazy talk."
Data released on Friday morning suggested the nation's job market  would post a similarly slow bounce-back. The Labor Department  said nonfarm payrolls plummeted by 20.5 million in April, pushing  the unemployment rate to 14.7%. With many major employers  struggling to stay solvent, hiring isn't likely to rebound in the  near term.
Major US banks sacrificed profits for loan-loss reserves in the  first quarter, shoring up cash to protect against souring debt.  Reserves totaled $46 billion in the three-month period compared  with $49 billion in all of 2019, according to Goldman, and the  defensive move assumed the unemployment rate would rise to only  about 10%.
With the labor market taking a harder-than-expected hit, the  analysts now see $115 billion in additional reserve bolstering  over the next 12 months.
The move is likely to force more companies to cancel  stock-repurchase programs. Goldman expects buybacks to shrink by  50% this year, pulling back on the stock market's biggest source  of demand over the past decade.
Companies enduring the economic downturn are likely to cut their  dividend payments as well, the team wrote. More than 40 stocks  have lowered or suspended their payments in 2020 so far, and  Goldman sees dividends sliding by 23% through the full year.
Capex spending could plunge 27% in 2020, the bank added, with  corporate growth plans halted until the economic backdrop  improves.
If the coronavirus pandemic and global oil-price conflict didn't  add enough volatility to the stock market, investors have the  2020 presidential election to look forward to. Goldman sees  market focus shifting to the race in the third quarter as the  economy stabilizes, and all eyes will be on how corporate tax  policy could change in the wake of a Democratic Party victory.
The 2017 tax law could be reversed if President Donald Trump  leaves the White House, and corporate profits could significantly  suffer for it. The analysts forecasted that the S&P 500's  earnings per share would slide by $19 next year if such a policy  action were taken; the index's price-earnings multiple would rise  15% from its "already stretched valuation," Goldman added.
Domestic politics aren't the only affairs driving heightened  market risk. A recent rekindling of trade tensions between the US  and China weighed on investors in early May and reminded markets  of the unresolved dispute. The White House's actions toward China  are "turning more hawkish," Goldman said, and the conflict is  likely to rear its head once the pandemic subsides.
Now read more markets coverage from Markets Insider  and Business Insider:
