This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Hedge Funds Outperformed the S&P 500 in the First Quarter. Here’s Why.
Hedge funds may have been bullishly positioned as the first coronavirus cases were reported in January, but they quickly lowered their exposure to risk in February, data from Jefferies shows.
As of January 31, hedge funds’ net long exposure was 205% but it quickly fell to 182% in February, just below the long-term average of 185%. The de-risking appeared to pay off. The hedge fund industry was down 9.4% in the first quarter —negative, to be sure, but far better than the 20% drop in the S&P 500 ,
      according to HFR data.
“[Hedge funds] seemed to quickly understand the magnitude of the selloff and took down exposure in February,” Steven DeSanctis, analyst at Jefferies, said in a note Tuesday. Last month, DeSanctis appeared worried about hedge fund’s increasing equity exposure in January, noting it was the “wrong time.”
DeSanctis tracks several types of hedge fund portfolio styles and noted that all styles in his coverage universe outperformed the S&P 500 from March’s market lows to the present day . Also, many did better than the index between the S&P 500’s February peak to today—a time when the index fell roughly 15%.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
Amazon.com (ticker: AMZN) remains a popular long position while Tesla (TSLA) is a popular short for hedge funds. A short position is when bearish investors borrow stock and then sell it, in a bet that the share price will fall.
Jefferies’ so-called “Battleground” portfolio, which contains names that are “very owned” by long-only funds and shorted by hedge funds, is down 9.3% since the market peak. Chevron (CVX), DexCom (DXCM), and Qualcomm (QCOM) were added to the portfolio, while Apple (AAPL), JPMorgan Chase (JPM), and UnitedHealth Group (UNH) left the group.
Some of the more dramatic moves came from stocks that went from net long positions to net short positions among hedge funds and vice versa, DeSanctis noted.
“The Long to Short portfolio was up 29% from the market low, which is NOT good, but for the entire period it is still off over 21%,” DeSanctis wrote. “The Short to Long rebounded nicely with a rise of 22.6% from the March 18 low, but is lagging over the entire time frame.”
Some names that went short to long between January and February are Apple, UnitedHealth, and General Electric (GE). On the flip side, Gilead Sciences (GILD), American Express (AXP), and Goldman Sachs went long to short over the same period.
Hedge Funds Outperformed the S&P 500 in the First Quarter. Here’s Why.
Hedge funds may have been bullishly positioned as the first coronavirus cases were reported in January, but they quickly lowered their exposure to risk in February, data from Jefferies shows.
