This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
The rout is on Monday, as stocks tumble across the board on renewed coronavirus fears. Add a price war in global oil markets , and investors simply have no appetite to buy stocks today.
The S&P 500 index was down 5.5% in midday trading, after circuit-breakers kicked in to briefly halt trading down 7% a few minutes after the open. Safe-haven assets like gold and U.S. government debt rallied, but so did a small handful of stocks. Eleven of the S&P 500 ’s
      505 components (some companies have multiple share classes, such as Alphabet’s GOOGL and GOOG) managed to rise on Monday.
Cabot Oil & Gas (ticker: COG) was the day’s top gainer , up 10%. Cabot is one of the largest U.S. natural gas companies. About a third of U.S. natural gas output comes as a byproduct of shale oil production. Traders are betting that the massive drop in oil prices on Monday causes shale producers to cut back on supply, leading to lower natural gas supply and higher prices. Cabot has a low cost of production and solid balance sheet, meaning it’s best positioned to withstand the current energy-market turmoil and emerge as a beneficiary.
Twitter (TWTR) stock gained 4% after its board announced a settlement with activist investors before Monday’s open. Jack Dorsey will stay on as CEO, and funds Elliott Management and Silver Lake Partners will each get board seats. The social media company will also buy back more of its stock.
Shares of AutoZone (AZO), O’Reilly Automotive (ORLY), and Advance Auto Parts (AAP)—all automotive replacement part retailers—also rose. Presumably, the thinking goes that lower gas prices mean more money in drivers’ pockets to spend on improving their cars.
Other retailers including Walmart (WMT), Dollar Tree (DLTR), Dollar General (DG), and Target (TGT) also saw their stocks rise on Monday, bucking the wider trend.
The auto-parts retailers are also seen as somewhat counter-recession stocks . If a downturn hits and consumers have less discretionary spending power, they’ll hold on to their cars longer rather than buying new vehicles. That could mean more demand for replacement parts from AutoZone, Advance, or O’Reilly.
It also explains why the retailers gaining on Monday are all discount or low-price stores. In a recession, consumers become more budget-conscious and increase their share of spending at discounters.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
Clorox (CLX) continued its market-beating run on Monday. It sells cleaning liquids, disinfecting wipes, germ-killing bleach, and more—basically all the products you would want to stock up on if you’re worried about a pandemic. So, investors are betting that the worse the coronavirus outbreak gets, the more demand Clorox will see this quarter, boosting earnings as a result.
H&R Block (HRB) shares also rose. The tax-prep company reported poor earnings on Friday, and its stock tanked 9%. Monday’s 3% rise may be just a bit of a rebound after the large drop. Tax season, of course, is also around the corner.
Finally, shares of Verizon Communications (VZ) also rose slightly on Monday. Barron’s and others have noted that its cash-rich, domestic, and recurring business is relatively insulated from the potential coronavirus disruption to the economy and consumer behavior. It’s a defensive buy on days like Monday. The stock carries a dividend yield of 4.4%.
The rout is on Monday, as stocks tumble across the board on renewed coronavirus fears.
