When you see one segment of the market in its own world, as no-yield tech stocks have been in since the rest of the market essentially topped out more than 2 years ago, you have to look at them as a different beast.
The other time in my career that it really paid off to separate no-yield-tech from the rest of the stock market was back in the 1999-2003 period. That is, the Dot-Com Bubble. Then as now, investors had this love-hate relationship between the 2 groups that at times was a real back-and-forth tussle.
This distinction is something that every investor who has accumulated some wealth to retire on, and has at least a modest exposure to stock index funds, needs to understand. Otherwise, you risk getting lulled into complacency, thinking that your index funds are “OK.”
Given the years-long, late bull market cycle stampede into no-yield tech stocks, there is a very good chance your portfolio is at risk of being clobbered once this tug of war between this popular market segment pulls back. In the Dot-Com era, that “pullback” was enough to erase more than 1/2 of many mutual fund portfolios.
This is yet another notch in the belt of those who employ an investment approach that looks beyond the tip of the iceberg, so to speak. Dissecting the market into smaller pieces is where I think the real value-added is today in portfolio management. After all, as the pictures above show, the “market” is not what you think it is.
Comments provided are informational only, not individual investment advice or recommendations. Sungarden provides Advisory Services through Dynamic Wealth Advisors.
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former mutual fund manager.  My work for Forbes.com aims to break investment myths and bring common sense analysis to my audience. My firm's website is www.SungardenInvestment.com.  Connect with me on Linked In, follow me on Twitter @robisbitts. Financial Advisors can visit www.TheHedgedInvestor.com for more.
