) are all flat or up this year. The S&P 500 Index is down 10% through mid-day Thursday.
However, the bottom line (worst performer) on this year-to-date chart above is down 17%. What is it? It is the S&P 500. But wait, didn’t I just say that the S&P 500 is only down 10%? The pink line is the same 500 stocks, but weighted equally in the index. In other words, the average S&P 500 stock is down 17% this year.
But when you weight them according to how large the outstanding amount of stock is, those 5 big companies lift the index. Reality or fake news, depending on how you look at it. Either way, the facts are real. And it shows how much of an optical illusion indexed investing can be if you don’t really know what you own.
Below, is the same group of 5 stocks and 2 versions of the S&P 500. However, instead of year-to-date, I go all the way back to the start of 2016. In retrospect, this is when I think the latter stages of the last bull market began. In fact, in my firm’s client reports, in addition to showing some standard performance periods, we recently added performance since 1/1/2016 as an additional data point.
As you see, the S&P 5 all appreciated by 70%-258%. The capitalization-weighted “headline” S&P 50o gained 42%. But the average stock within the S&P 500 is only up 25%. In more than 4 years! Long-term, that’s a decent return of about 5% per year. But do returns like that make you adjust your perspective on how the last several years have gone? It should.
That’s around the time the Federal Reserve saved what probably should have been a mild recession, and pumped up the economy so that we could have a much bigger recession now. I believe this is where the big-time FOMO started, and it continues today. Which is why narrow bear market rallies like this one, while they happen and go on longer than most think they will, are still bear market rallies.
Pay attention, know what you own and why you are performing the way you are. And don’t get complacent. Otherwise, you are just faking yourself out.
Comments provided are informational only, not individual investment advice or recommendations. Sungarden provides Advisory Services through Dynamic Wealth Advisors.
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former mutual fund manager.  My work for Forbes.com aims to break investment myths and bring common sense analysis to my audience. My firm's website is www.SungardenInvestment.com.  Connect with me on Linked In, follow me on Twitter @robisbitts. Financial Advisors can visit www.TheHedgedInvestor.com for more.
