University endowments, like many money managers, have a hard time beating the market. New figures show that these big investors missed the decadelong rally in U.S. stocks by a long shot.
U.S. college endowments gained an annual 8.4% on average in the 10 years through June 30, according to a study published on Thursday by the New York–based money manager TIAA and the National Association of College and University Business Officers. The S&P 500 index returned 14.7% annually in the period, and the Vanguard Balanced Index fund, a blend of stocks and bonds, gained 10.3% annually.
Why did these big investors lag behind so badly? Many tended to disdain U.S. stocks and bonds in favor of alternative assets like venture capital, private equity, and hedge funds. In the 12 months through June 30, endowments on average had only 14.1% of their portfolios in U.S. stocks.
School endowments don’t necessarily try to beat the market. They are more apt to preserve endowments in perpetuity. “If we had a portfolio allocated just in the S&P 500, we would have looked smart, but the risk would have been massive, and hindsight is always 20-20,’’ said Kevin O’Leary, TIAA’s chief executive officer of endowment and philanthropic services.
Endowments performed well by one measure. The 8.4% gain for the 10 years surpassed many of the funds’ goal of long-term average returns of 7%. One reason: the average 18.7% loss in fiscal 2009 during the global financial crisis isn’t factored in.
Stocks fell on coronavirus fears, then clawed back on stellar earnings from Apple, Tesla, and Amazon.com . The yield curve toyed with inversion, the Federal Reserve held rates steady, and gross domestic product was unchanged at 2.1%. Then, on Friday, stocks cratered—led by Apple. On the week, the Dow Industrial Average shed 2.5%, to 28,256.03; the S&P 500 fell 2.1%, to 3225.52; and the Nasdaq Composite lost 1.8%, to 9150.94.
Six coronavirus cases have been confirmed in the U.S., out of nearly 10,000 in all, over 200 of which have resulted in fatalities. In China and Hong Kong the effect has been huge, with much of the spending over the Lunar New Year curtailed. Hong Kong, already stunned by months of protests, banned visitors from Wuhan, suspended high-speed rail to China, and reduced flights. In China, Shanghai Disneyland closed, Starbucks
IBM ’s temporarily shuttered half of its cafes, and airlines canceled flights to China.
Just as President Trump’s legal team began his impeachment-trial defense, excerpts from former National Security Adviser John Bolton’s book leaked. Bolton reportedly wrote that Trump had told him he held up aid to Ukraine to force an investigation into former Vice President Joe Biden. In a tweet, Trump denied the charge, and the White House said the book contained classified material. On Friday, after days of questions, the Senate voted on a mostly party line not to call witnesses.
In the midst of the trial, Trump announced his long-delayed Middle East peace plan, which he called “the deal of the century.” Trump rolled out a proposal at the White House with Israel’s Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu that included a Palestinian state but featured large concessions to Israel on the West Bank. No Palestinian representatives attended, and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas denounced the plan as “a conspiracy deal.” Netanyahu said he would quickly move to claim sovereignty over a third of the West Bank.
The United Kingdom left the European Union at midnight on Friday, kicking off talks with the EU and the U.S. on trade. Secretary of Treasury Steven Mnuchin said he hoped a new trade pact could be signed by year end. Separately, the U.K. allowed China’s Huawei limited access to its 5G network, against U.S. policy.
IBM CEO Ginni Rometty, 62, resigned after 40 years at the computer company. She’ll be replaced by Arvind Krishna, senior vice president for cloud and cognitive software. IBM recently reported its first revenue growth in six quarters, helped by the $34 billion purchase of Red Hat last year.
University endowments, like many money managers, have a hard time beating the market.
