Later that decade, the Financial Crisis evolved similarly. A dip in late 2007, when Bear Stearns’ collapse made it obvious that the environment was changing quickly. Then, 2008 happened. And so did early 2009. Bottom line: a market crash of about 50%, which took about half the time (18 months) of the previous bear market, the one I showed you above. Again, it took a while to recover. By late 2012, the S&P 500 was still only 5% above where it peaked in 2007.
No survey of market tops would be complete without a look at the Crash of 1987. While this did not prompt a recession like the other 2 did, the result for investors was similar. By late 1990, 3 years after the infamous 22% plunge in the index on October 19, 1987, the S&P 500 was just about where it had been before the 1987 one-day debacle.
Every one of these severe market downturns started with what some considered to be a harmless, buy-able dip. And, that brings us to today’s market, shown below.
We may not know for a little while. However, I think the tell-tale sign is something that is, if you will, a by-product of the type of price movements I showed you above. I am talking about “sentiment.”
That is, the emotions investors feel toward the stock market and investing. True bear markets change that feeling. It goes from euphoria, overconfidence and, dare I say, hubris, to shock, denial and frustration.
We don’t know the ultimate outcome of this recent market dive. However, using history as a guide, I would not bet on this being simply a dip. That means investors must prioritize aggressive capital preservation. It also means they need to think VERY differently about how to grow their capital in the months, and maybe years ahead. More on that in my next article.
Comments provided are informational only, not individual investment advice or recommendations. Sungarden provides Advisory Services through Dynamic Wealth Advisors.
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former mutual fund manager.  My work for Forbes.com aims to break investment myths and bring common sense analysis to my audience. My firm's website is www.SungardenInvestment.com.  Connect with me on Linked In, follow me on Twitter @robisbitts. Financial Advisors can visit www.TheHedgedInvestor.com for more.
