Summary Motilal Oswal Asset Management Company Ltd. has announced the launch of Motilal Oswal S&P 500 Index Fund, an open ended scheme replicating / tracking US’s S&P 500 Index.
Motilal Oswal Asset Management Company Ltd. has announced the launch of Motilal Oswal S&P 500 Index Fund, an open ended scheme replicating / tracking US’s S&P 500 Index. The fund will be managed by Herin Visaria for foreign securities and Abhiroop Mukherjee for debt component.
Motilal Oswal S&P 500 Index Fund will provide an opportunity to invest in one of the world’s most popular indices. The fund will provide Indian investors an exposure to the performance of leading 500 companies listed in United States. The S&P 500 Index is widely regarded as the best single gauge of large-cap U.S. equities and covers approximately 80% of available market. The S&P 500 Index is world’s largest index with a track record of 63 years, making it one of the oldest indices in the world.
“If you entered the Indian equity markets and you had no clue where to start you would start with the A group in BSE, similarly if you entered the Global equity markets from another planet and you had no clue where to start you would start with S&P 500. It’s the world’s A group or the world’s large cap index composed of some of the biggest global companies. And, we at Motilal Oswal AMC are happy to provide access,” Aashish Somaiyaa, Managing Director & CEO, Motilal Oswal Asset Management Company.
The S&P 500 index is the best gauge of the US market as it constitutes 82% of the US stock market. It has exposure to all 11 sectors and has exposure to purely large cap companies. It is a global index with 40% of its investments coming from overseas. After recent correction, S&P 500 Index may have arrived at an attractive valuation to enter.
“With the launch of the S&P500 index fund - we are excited to have Jack Bogle's legacy and spirit in India (Founder, Vanguard Mutual Fund). It’s a fund that is present in almost every investor’s portfolio in the US and a great way to start the process of international diversification – helping Indian investors fight rupee depreciation as well as portfolio volatility. It was the first ever passive fund launched (way back in 1975) and the biggest one today,” said Pratik Oswal, Head of Passive Funds , Motilal Oswal Asset Management Company.
“We are excited that Motilal Oswal has launched a fund based on the S&P 500 Index to provide Indian investors’ access to global companies in a diverse range of sectors and industries. The S&P 500 is one of the world’s most recognized and premier gauges for U.S. stock market performance. S&P Dow Jones Indices is committed to offering choice and delivering independent and transparent indices, research, data and analytics to market participants,” said Koel Ghosh, Head of South Asia, S&P Dow Jones Indices
Motilal Oswal S&P 500 Index Fund will be launched on 15 April 2020 and will remain open for subscription till 23 April 2020. The minimum application amount is Rs.500/- and in multiples of Re. 1/- thereafter.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
