The Effect Of Mandatory Mask Policies And Politics On Economic Recovery: A State By State View
Now here’s the thing, while I.T. makes up 26% of the S&P 500, energy comprises 3%. Therefore what happens to the tech sector matters more than eight times as much for the S&P 500 than what happens to energy right now.
So the market, especially when expressed by benchmarks such as the S&P 500, isn’t ignoring the pain, but the weighting structure matters. Yes, energy stocks, in aggregate, have more than halved in 2020, but their weighting in the index isn’t large enough to really move the needle all that much. In contrast certain tech firms are actually benefiting economically from certain aspects of the crisis and their stocks have fared better as a result.
Of course, having a few stocks dominate the S&P 500 isn’t a new thing. Historically though the names have change it is absolutely normal for the largest companies to have weights of 5% in the index or more and the largest handful of stocks to make up 20% of the market or more. What’s relatively new for this recession is that the largest names happen to be in tech, and tech is holding up better than many industries. Therefore, the S&P 500 is not the best barometer for the state of the economy right now.
To test this we can look at different, less followed indices. For example, while the S&P 500 is down 13% an equal-weighted version S&P 500 index, where each stock carries the same weighting, rather then larger companies having a greater weighting, is down 20%. Also, U.S. small caps are off 23%. While we can still debate the disconnect between the economy and the markets, even on these numbers , we can see that part of the reason the S&P 500 is holding up reasonably well is a function of its composition.
The S&P 500 has a very significant weighting for those stocks that are seeing a less bad crisis than others, namely tech stocks. And what’s the second largest sector behind tech? It’s healthcare. So the composition of the index you look at matters and today broadly 40 cents of every dollar in the S&P 500 index by value is made up of tech and healthcare shares. Exactly those companies that are often holding up better in the crisis.
Therefore, don’t be too surprised when the S&P 500 doesn’t match the underlying performance of the economy. This crisis is somewhat different in that there are some relative winners at this point, and those companies are over-represented in the popular S&P 500 index.
