back in November, led gainers on the index on Thursday.
In comparison, both the S&P 500 and the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite Index COMP,
closed up 0.3%, and the First Trust Cloud Computing ETF SKYY,
said it expects first-quarter subscription revenue of $975 million to $980 million, and  subscription billings of $1.04 billion to $1.05 billion. Analysts were expecting subscription sales of $959.7 million, and subscription billings of $1.05 billion.
Of the 37 analysts who cover ServiceNow, 30 have overweight or buy ratings and seven have hold ratings. Of those analysts, 24 hiked their price targets on the stock for an average $357.76 target, according to FactSet.
Stifel analyst Tom Roderick, who has a buy rating and raised his price target to $380 from $340, said  ServiceNow’s conference call dispelled fears of a slowdown in the Software-as-a-Service space that were percolating back in October .
Roderick said “not a single portion of the call (prepared remarks nor Q&A) even bothered to address the macro, as if the concerns of 90 days ago are an afterthought.”
“That likely oversimplifies the world, but without a doubt, NOW’s robust results should create broader confidence for the entire SaaS sector,” the Stifel analyst said.
Evercore ISI’s Kirk Materne, who has an outperform rating and raised his price target to $360 from $344, called ServiceNow’s forecast a “Goldilocks” outlook.
“All in, we believe NOW remains one of the most unique compounding stories in software, and while the shares may need to consolidate a bit after a massive rally since Oct., we believe the 6-12 month risk/reward remains attractive,” Materne said.
William Blair analyst Bhavan Suri, who has an outperform rating, said much of the fourth-quarter beat was driven by “large deal activity” and that he sees “plenty of growth opportunity left in the IT markets as tech stacks become more complex and enterprises seek to modernize their IT workflows.”
Canaccord Genuity analyst Richard Davis, who has a buy rating and raised their price target to $375 from $285, ranked the company as a peer among cloud standouts.
“Since its IPO we have asserted that ServiceNow was destined to become one of the big next-generation platforms alongside Salesforce CRM,
