Despite the slump in the UK and Euro area services sector activity as well as the contraction in the factories, which points towards a recession, the risk-on trading action in the European trading remains unperturbed.
Markets continue to cheer the stimulus measures deployed by the German government and the US Federal Reserve (Fed) to tackle the economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. Further, the prospects of the US Congress reaching the economic package deal against the virus spread also added to the renewed optimism across the global markets.
The market mood received a further boost amid signs of a likely slowdown in the virus spread in Italy, the new epicenter of the outbreak. Italy’s new coronavirus cases fell for a second day to near 700, slightly less than the previous day.
Subsequently, S&P 500 futures extend the rally by 5% and hit the limit-up band of 2,333.50. Among the European indices, the pan-European benchmark, EuroStoxx 50 is up 5.80%, Germany’s DAX rises 6.50% while the UK’s FTSE 100 jumps 4% and French CAC 40 gains nearly 4% so far this session.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
