S&P 500 Futures part ways from Wall Street’s mild losses, US Treasuries register small gains.
Fears of US-China tussle, downbeat US data weighed on the risk-tone sentiment earlier, hopes of economic restart seem to help off-late.
Traders’ caution ahead of the key US GDP, FOMC also plays its role.
While S&P 500 Futures defy Wall Street’s mild losses with 0.30% gains to 2,875, small gains of the US 10-year Treasury yields, up 0.6 basis point to 0.616%, portrays a mild risk-on sentiment during the early Asian session on Wednesday.
Market’s risk-tone earlier struggled amid mixed messages concerning the European, Pacific and the US economies’ restart and a tussle between the US and China.
Having witnessed further flattening of the coronavirus (COVID-19) curve, the US, Europe and the Pacific nations are recently signaling how they will roll back the lockdown restrictions. This offers a sigh of relief to the global traders after more than a month of economic pause.
However, the US allegation on China, for the spread of the deadly virus, seems to ignite a fresh US-China trade war and keeps the trade sentiment pressured.
Also weighing on the markets were downbeat US economics ranging from multi-year low consumer confidence figures to negative manufacturing gauge.
It’s worth mentioning that the recent risk-on sentiment is also pressured due to the market’s wait for the key US GDP and FOMC data. “After +2.1% in Q4, the median forecast for Q1 is -4% annualized (i.e. -1%qtr) but with a wide range of estimates. The +/- 1 standard deviation in the Bloomberg survey is -6% to -2.1%. With the fed funds rate midpoint at the effective lower bound of 0.125%, QE open-ended and some new special facilities to ease market strains not even operational yet, no notable policy change is anticipated. Chair Powell will then hold the post-FOMC meeting press conference at 4:30 am AEST. He is likely to be asked about possible next steps such as extended forward guidance and yield curve control, along with a likely dismissal of the idea of negative interest rates,” said Westpac.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
