US stock futures return to the red starting out a fresh week.
Second coronavirus wave fears intensify, with the US, Japan reporting spike in cases.
S&P 500 futures back below 3000 level, points to negative Tokyo open.
The closely watched, risk gauge, the S&P 500 futures tumbled near 1.80% stepping into a fresh week, shrugging off a positive Wall Street close last Friday.
The sentiment was knocked down by the intensifying concerns over the second wave of coronavirus tightening its grip across the globe, with the US and Japan bearing the brunt so far.
The US states of California, Texas and Florida saw a continuous rise in new infections over the weekend, with a mounting number of hospitalizations and deaths, as they push further into the economic re-opening up.
In Asia, the Japanese capital, Tokyo reported 47 new cases on Sunday, the highest count since May 5. The Tokyo Governor Koike, however, downplayed the concerns, citing that the jump in cases resulted from very active testing.
The second wave fears will likely continue to weigh on any optimism over the economic re-opening up optimism while investors remain doubtful about the global economic rebound, given last week’s downbeat projections from the US Federal Reserve (Fed) Chairman J. Powell.
Looking ahead, the risk trends will continue to emerge as the main market driver amid incoming virus updates and key US economic updates. The US Retail Sales data and Powell’s testimony will stand out this week.
At the time of writing, the S&P 500 futures drop 1.25% to 2987, recovering quickly from a 13-day low of 2971.25.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
