Last week was a wild one, ending on a “quadruple witching” event Friday, as stock index options, stock index futures, stock options, and single stock futures expired. No surprise, then, to see a market gyrate from massive losses to gains to losses all in the space of the trading day. Unless you’re only trading the Nasdaq index, which continues its march higher at only 54 points away from the recently broke 10,000 mark, within reach of all-time highs again. ETF fund flows were generally positive, with only one significant exception this week, among the top AUM funds. However, our deep learning algorithms paired with our Artificial Intelligence (“AI”) technology thinks that you might want to be cautious in the upcoming week. More on that, below.
There were two “Neutral” rated ETFs from our AI systems this week, in the Vanguard Total Stock Market ETF (VTI) and the SPDR Gold Shares (GLD). There certainly seems to be some irrational exuberance in both markets this year, with the former gaining over 40% from the March 23 lows, and the latter gaining over 28% in the last year. The last week was a boon for both in terms of fund flows, gaining $2.56 billion and $1.28 billion, respectively. This is a continuance of the longer-term inflows for the two ETFs, as they have gained $5.68 billion and an impressive $12.15 billion in the last 90 days. That is especially impressive for the GLD holding, as its AUM stands at $64.646 billion total with the additions, so a significant increase this year. Net expense ratios for the two holdings are attractive at 0.03% and 0.04%, but our deep learning algorithms are indifferent on the direction going forward.
Next up we have three “Unattractive” ratings applied from our AI technology. They are all for core S&P 500 ETFs, which might be signalling we are getting expensive in the market, after another week of gains. The SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust (SPY), the iShares Core S&P 500 ETF (IVV), and the Vanguard S&P 500 ETF (VOO) are the names to watch this week. Fund flows were mixed this week, with a loss of -$1.88 billion, a gain of $125 million, and a gain of $6.49 billion. That might have something to do with the net expense ratios, as the first has the highest at 0.094%, whereas the following two have a more reasonable 0.04% and 0.03% for the passive holdings. The 90-day fund flows appear to confirm that trend, with outflows of -$11.97 billion, outflows of -$6.17 billion, and inflows to the cheapest S&P 500 ETF of $3.8 billion. You’ll notice the returns below are directly correlated with the cost of each fund, cheaper is definitely better in this case.
