S&P 500 prints another recovery moves from below 3,000 area.
China’s Sinopharm Group spreads upbeat news concerning the pandemic’s cure during the weekend.
Worsening virus conditions in the US, China and Japan earlier weighed on the market’s risk-tone.
S&P 500 Futures take the bids near 3,012, up 0.20% on a day, amid the initial Tokyo session on Monday. The risk gauge recently bounced as China’s return from holidays cheered news concerning the coronavirus (COVID-19) cure from the Asian major’s drug manufacturer. However, the risk-on mood remains confined amid surging numbers from the key global economies, coupled with the trade war and geopolitical tension.
During the weekend, China’s Sinopharm Group mentioned that its second vaccine has been found to be safe and able to generate a high concentration of antibodies among participants in phase I and II clinical trials. On the contrary, China’s Anxin County was recently pushed under the strict lockdown measures like Wuhan experienced at the start of the pandemic. Additionally, Global Times came out with the news suggesting “Chinese biopharmaceutical firm CanSino Biologics Inc developed the vaccine in conjunction with a military research team. The overall clinical results indicate Ad5-nCoV has the potential to prevent diseases caused by SARS-CoV-2.”
Updates form the US have been worrisome as Texas marked the seventh day whereas the disease figures have been above 5,000 whereas Los Angeles County printed near-record surge in the cases by 2,542 to the total of 97,894 by Sunday. Further, California marked an increase of 4,810 cases to 21,243 total.
It’s worth mentioning that Tokyo registered an additional 60 cases during Sunday. This becomes the highest figure from Japan’s capital since the state of emergency was ended on May 25.
Other than the virus woes, geopolitical tussles between India and China, as well as the US-Iran tension, also weigh on the market’s risk-tone sentiment. Additionally, trade-negative measures from the US renew the fears of trade wars and offer an additional burden on the trading sentiment. While also portraying the market mood, other than the S&P 500 Futures, the US 10-year treasury yields seesaw around 0.64% whereas Japan’s Nikkei and Australia’s ASX 200 recede from the early-day lows.
Moving on, global market players may keep eyes on the risk-catalysts, mainly the virus updates for fresh impulse during the Asian session. Though, the start of the EU-UK Brexit talks and US data might entertain the traders during the later part of the day.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
