S&P 500 futures extend Thursday’s gains, follow Wall Street’s footsteps.
US 10-Treasury yields bounce back from the three-day low.
US-China tension renews, trade negotiators will be on the call early next week.
US employment data, trade/virus update will be the key.
While portraying risk-on sentiment, S&P 500 Futures register 0.15% gains to 2,885 whereas US 10-year Treasury yields rise 1.2 basis points (bps) to 0.643% amid early Asian session on Friday.
In doing so, the equity gauge carries the previous day’s recovery gains, also copies Wall Street’s performance, while US bonds yields bounce off three-day low.
News that top diplomats from the US and China will renew trade negotiations as early as next week, per Bloomberg, initially triggered risk-on sentiment during Thursday. The moves were then carried forward by Japan’s acceptance of Gilead’s Remdesivir as a cure to the coronavirus (COVID-19).
Although the news favored equities to remain on the front-foot, US bond yields fail to carry Wednesday’s run-up to three-week high amid downbeat signals from the US Federal Reserve policymakers.
Moving on, the markets are likely to witness the pre-NFP trading lull but trade/virus headlines could offer intermediate moves. Further, the US employment report for April is likely to weigh on the market’s sentiment considering the virus-led lockdowns during that month. In regards to this, Goldman Sachs said, “Nonfarm payrolls (NFP) declined by 24 million in April, the unemployment rate rose from 4.4% to 14.0%.”
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
