S&P 500 Futures drop 0.06% while taking rounds to 3,116.
Fed’s Kaplan trimmed some of the initial losses with upbeat statements.
Headlines from North Korea, Beijing question the earlier risk-on sentiment.
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s visit to Hawaii also probes the risk-on mood.
S&P 500 Futures register 0.06% losses while trading around 3,116 during the initial Asian session on Wednesday. The risk barometer recently gained after Dallas Fed President Robert Kaplan spoke positively for the US economy. However, the traders are still cautious considering the risk of the coronavirus (COVID-19) resurgence and geopolitical tension in Asia.
Fed’s Kaplan said that the US economy probably bottomed in early May. The policymakers also poured cold water on the face of expectations favoring downbeat employment numbers while expecting ‘strong’ job reports in summer.
On the other hand, Beijing locks outbound travels in the latest effort to curb the pandemic’s wave 2.0 whereas Japan registers the highest fresh cases since May 30. Also challenging the market’s mood could be the geopolitical tension between the North and the South of Korea, as well as among India and China.
Additionally, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo is heading to Hawaii to meet the Chinese diplomats. Considering the recent tension between the US and China, coupled with the Pompeo’s hard stand against Beijing, traders remain cautious ahead of the meeting. It should also be noted that downbeat outcomes of the Reuters Tankan Survey and Iran’s refrain to give access to two of its nuclear sites also contribute towards challenging the previous risk-on sentiment.
Against this backdrop, the market optimists may extend their latest pause while any more negative news could recall the risk-off sentiment.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
