S&P 500 Futures recovers early-day losses.
US VP Pence is not self-isolating versus the early-day reports.
US President Trump differs from the policymakers’ upbeat concerns for China.
A light economic calendar keeps the trade/virus updates on the driver’s seat.
S&P 500 Futures retraces the early-day losses while taking rounds to 2,925, down 0.11% on a day, amid the pre-Tokyo Asian session on Monday. The risk barometer recently recovered after the news broke that the US Vice President is not self-isolating as against the previous updates.
Earlier in Asia, Bloomberg’s Jennifer Jacobs tweeted, "Vice President Mike Pence is self-isolating away from the White House after an aide was diagnosed with coronavirus on Friday, per several people familiar with the situation. Pence has repeatedly tested negative for COVID-19, including today, I’m told."
However, the VP’s office recently confirmed that Pence is not self-isolating & will be at the White House tomorrow.
In addition to the coronavirus (COVID-19) related news, US-China trade updates also flash US and Chinese diplomats agreed to remain in communication and cooperation on Friday, as per Xinhua, but US President Donald Trump said otherwise in his latest comments. The Republican leader mentioned that he is “having a very hard time with China” and that COVID-19 “sort of overrides so much”. US President Trump also said, “I’m very torn, I have not decided yet if you want to know the truth.”
Furthermore, the Aussie-China tussle is also in focus after China’s Global Times (GT) suggests further hardships for Australia. The reason could be traced from the Aussie PM Scott Morrison’s lobbying for the inquiry into the virus outbreak.
Given the mixed risk catalysts and a lack of major data/events on the economic calendar, traders await clear guidelines for near-term direction. In doing so, they will keep a close eye on the virus/trade news.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
