Risk-off is in full swing in Asia with the major indices reporting notable losses.
Gold and other haven assets are attracting bids.
Coronavirus cases outside China are increasing, forcing investors to shun risk.
The US equity index futures are flashing red along with the Asian shares while gold is gaining ground on reports showing the number of coronavirus cases outside of China has increased.
At press time, the futures on the S&P 500 are down 1.28% or 42 points, while Australia's ASX 200 and South Korea's Kospi are shedding 2% and 2.58%, respectively.
Gold is currently trading at $1,662 per Oz, representing a 1.12% gain on the day, having hit a high of $1,681 an hour ago.
In the FX markets, the South Korean won is facing selling pressure. The currency fell to 1,218.35 against the dollar, the weakest since August earlier today.
The anti-risk yen, however, has erased early gains, as evidenced by USD/JPY's recovery from 111.27 to 111.57.
The flight to safety could be associated with the emergence of clusters of infection in new countries including South Korea, Italy, and Iran, as noted by the Wall Street Journal.
South Korea has reportedly seen a 20-fold increase in the number of infections in the five days. Meanwhile, Italy canceled some public events after coronavirus infections rose to 140 despite lockdown in the North. Additionally, reports are doing the rounds that millions of small businesses in China are facing a cash crunch may collapse if banks don't act.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
