S&P 500 futures flip to gains amid improving mood.
Technical set up turns in favor of the bulls.
Holiday-thinned trades boost the upside attempts.
S&P 500 futures, the risk barometer, has turned positive in early Europe, largely suggesting a shift in the risk sentiment, as upbeat US jobs data underpin hopes for a quick economic rebound.
Meanwhile, the US holiday-thinned market conditions also seem to exaggerate the renewed upside in the futures.
From a near-term technical perspective, the price has charted a symmetrical triangle pattern on the hourly sticks, calling for a rally towards 3,165, the likely pattern target.
The hourly Relative Strength Index (RSI) points upwards at 60.27, indicating the further upside play remains intact.
The bullish break gained momentum after the price regained the horizontal 21-hourly Simple Moving Average (HMA) for the first time since Thursday’s NY close. With this, the futures now trade above all the major HMAs.
Any pullback will challenge the bears' commitment at the resistance-turned-support of 21-HMA, now at 3,130. A break below which the rising trendline support at 3,125 will be tested.
Further south, the upward sloping 50-HMA will offer some strong support, limiting the declines in the near-term.
Information on these pages contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Markets and instruments profiled on this page are for informational purposes only and should not in any way come across as a recommendation to buy or sell in these assets. You should do your own thorough research before making any investment decisions. FXStreet does not in any way guarantee that this information is free from mistakes, errors, or material misstatements. It also does not guarantee that this information is of a timely nature. Investing in Open Markets involves a great deal of risk, including the loss of all or a portion of your investment, as well as emotional distress. All risks, losses and costs associated with investing, including total loss of principal, are your responsibility. The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of FXStreet nor its advertisers.
