lagged the other major averages for a change, up just 1.5% for the week.
The S&P 500’s closed above the 3000 level and its 200-day moving average (MA) for the first time since March 4, as it has next resistance in the 3090-3130 area. This increased the confidence of many investors. In the latest survey from the American Association of Individual Investors (AAII), the percentage of bullish investors (Bullish%) rose slightly to 31.1%, which is well below the long term average of 38%.
The low reading in the Bullish% of 23.3% came on May 14, when the S&P 500 closed at 2850. The week of the S&P low, the Bullish% was higher at 32.9% and did not reach the very low levels at 20% or lower than are often seen at market bottoms .
The readings from the Bearish% have been more typical. On March 26, the Bearish% was 52.1% and is now at 42.1 % as of last week. It is still at a relatively high level, with the long term average from AAII at 30.5%. In late December 2019, it was 20.5% as it was in April and February 2019.
Other sentiment readings are mixed, but option expert Lawrence G. McMillan noted that the last time the standard put-call ratios were this low was in “January 2018 and January 2020 – both major tops”. Put/call ratios are used as a contrary indicator, and this low level reflects extreme optimism and is a sign there is too much call buying.
Some think that the fact that the S&P 500 was able to close above its 200-day MA is a bullish signal going forward. There are plenty of times this has not been the case. For example, the S&P 500 plunged in August 2015 in the worst monthly decline since 2011. For the Dow Jones Industrials it was its worst August in 17 years.
The S&P 500 rallied in early September 2015, but by September 29 (point 1) it had dropped back to the lows. This set the stage for a dramatic rally. By October 23, the S&P 500 had closed back above its 200-day MA (point 2). Over the next two months there were several moves above and below the 200-day MA before the market began to plunge in early 2016. It was not until February 2016 that there were signs of a strong technical bottom .
This is just one example why I do not find the crossing of the 200-day MA is be especially significant from a technical basis. I place more emphasis on the advance/decline data which had improved as the stock market started the holiday-shortened week.
The market internals were strong for the second week in a row which does favor further gains. On the NYSE there were 2496 issues advancing last week and 546 declining. All of the weekly advance/decline lines that I follow closed the week back above their weighted moving averages (WMA). The NYSE All A/D line dropped below its WMA three weeks ago but has since flipped back to positive.
The NYSE Stocks-Only A/D line has been below its WMA since February 24, and for the first time since then it has closed back above it. This A/D line did form lower highs early in the year (line a), and a move through this downtrend is needed to confirm that a major new uptrend is underway.
The NYSE Composite closed at 11,802 last week, which increases the odds that it will be able to close above the 61.8% Fibonacci resistance level at 12,075. Most bear market rallies over the past 50 years have failed below similar resistance levels.
So if the NYSE closes above the 61.8% resistance level, what will be the strategy going forward?
Despite the market’s strength, I think that the S&P 500 is likely to drop back at least towards the May 14 low of 2766, which is currently 9% below last Friday’s close. The support in the 2640 area is even more important, as a 10-20% decline is likely.
Why will we see such a pullback? The unknowns about the economic recovery are not any more clear right now than the impact of the virus was on February 17 when my article “A Historically Overbought Market” was posted after the S&P 500 closed at 3380. This was a week before the stock market started dropping sharply.
Both the rapid reversal in sentiment and the seemingly cavalier attitude of many towards the COVID-19 virus have me concerned. But most concerning is the economic outlook, which I do not think will as good as expected. For example, if two million Americans move off the employment rolls each week, it would take twenty weeks—five months—for these unemployed to go back to work. Does that seem likely?
discusses some of the challenges and unknowns about forecasting when and how the economy might recover after the pandemic. He concludes that “we shouldn’t be surprised if we see post-pandemic economic weakness over the next decade.”
I think last month’s decline of 13.6% in consumer spending is likely to get worse before it gets better as the saving rate increases. The price action of a stock like Lululemon Athletica
(LULU) does not seem sustainable. LULU closed at $310.19 the week, up 8.4%, up 34% for the month. Do I think it is more likely to move another 20% higher or 20% lower as people go back to work in June? Last week, one analyst raised their target for LULU to $335. Its earnings are out this week on June 3.
Therefore, I am not willing to chase the market higher in this current environment. There are several less economically sensitive ETFs, like biotechnology, which are only 5-10% above good long term support. That is where I am focusing on in the weeks ahead. There also continue to be a number of short-term trading opportunities.
In my Viper ETF Report and the Viper Hot Stocks Report , I update subscribers with market analysis twice per week, along with specific buy and sell advice. Each report is just $34.95 per month. New subscribers also receive six free trading lessons.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
