At 6:08 a.m. ET, S&P 500 e-minis were up 1.85 per cent at 3,007.5.
The futures contract broke through 2,988.38, a 200-day simple moving average, suggesting a strong day ahead for US stocks.
US stock futures rose 2 per cent and breached a major chart barrier on Tuesday as global easing of lockdowns and business restarts boosted optimism about economic recovery among investors returning from a long weekend.
Spain urged foreign holidaymakers to return from July as it eases one of Europe's strictest curbs, while Britain was looking to reopen thousands of High Street shops, department stores and shopping centers next month.
The beaten down travel-related stocks gained in premarket trading with United Airlines Holdings Inc, online travel agency Expedia Group Inc, hotel operator Marriott International Inc all up about 8 per cent each.
Wall Street's main indexes ended mixed on Friday as China-US tensions heated up, but still managed to log more than 3 per cent gains for the week, fueled by hopes of an eventual coronavirus vaccine and easing of virus-related curbs.
At 6:08 a.m. ET, S&P 500 e-minis were up 1.85 per cent at 3,007.5. The futures contract broke through 2,988.38, a 200-day simple moving average, suggesting a strong day ahead for US stocks.
Dow e-minis were up 494 points, or 2.02 per cent and Nasdaq 100 e-minis were up 170.25 points, or 1.81 per cent.
Later in the day, the Conference Board's data is expected to show consumer confidence index edged up slightly after hitting a six year low in April.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
