This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Stocks Will Move Very Differently as the Economy Reopens. It’s Time to Pick the Winners.
Updated May 1, 2020 3:20 pm ET / Original May 1, 2020 8:00 am ET
Thanks to the coronavirus pandemic and resulting economic damage, S&P 500 stocks’ returns haven’t varied this much since the Great Recession. The good news: The wide range of returns in the asset class actually offers great opportunities for stock picking .
Until recently, the stock market had been experiencing a decade of low return dispersion, meaning stock returns hadn’t varied all that much by historical standards. That narrower range of returns among stocks made it challenging for stock pickers to differentiate themselves from the crowd and partially contributed to the boom in index-tracking passive funds, as many active managers failed to outperform .
That has suddenly changed. The unprecedented economic uncertainty caused by the Covid-19 pandemic has shaken up markets, hit corporate earnings, and sent equity valuations in all different directions. As a result, stock returns are diverging the most they have since the 2007-09 recession, according to Goldman Sachs strategist Ryan Hammond.
Return dispersion is dependent on two factors, market volatility and stock correlations, and it is the highest when volatility is elevated and correlations are low, according to Hammond.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
This recent divergence in stock performance has been driven mainly by high market volatility. The average magnitude of the S&P 500’s daily moves in 2018 and 2019 were 0.7% and 0.6%, respectively, but from the beginning of 2020 to last week, the average was 2.3%. Meanwhile, stocks were still moving closely with each other , driven by macro factors such as size, value, and sector, instead of each company’s idiosyncratic risk.
Return dispersion among stocks will likely stay elevated in the coming weeks, says Hammond, but volatility won’t be the culprit now, which has subsided since mid-March amid the market’s relief rally. While the dispersion of returns typically widens during market selloffs, history shows that it often rises even further as the market rebounds into a new bull market.
In this phase, the decline in volatility is often more than offset by lower correlations among stocks, as investors try to differentiate between the relative winners and losers in a highly uncertain environment. “While the coronavirus has initially acted as a ‘macro shock,’ we expect investors will increasingly focus on the single-stock and thematic implications,” Hammond wrote last week in a research report.
As more states have reopened parts of their economies , it has become especially important to evaluate different companies’ financial damage, business outlooks, and possible paths to recovery. The first-quarter earnings season presents a great opportunity for investors to hear from companies directly, says Hammond, and the different takes from those earnings calls could drive stock correlations lower and return dispersion wider.
Among sectors, consumer discretionary stocks are most likely to have heightened responses to idiosyncratic news, according to Goldman Sachs’ framework. That means the sector offers some of the best stock-picking opportunities going forward.
Goldman Sachs offered a list of 25 stocks whose price movements are driven more by company-specific factors than the typical S&P 500 company. That means they’ll likely bring more rewards to effective bottom-up stock selection.
If you have trouble viewing the list below, please click here .
*Micro-driven return is defined as the proportion of stock returns that cannot be explained by market, sector, size, or value factors. **Dispersion score is a product of firm-specific risk––the forecast 6-month volatility of the proportion of returns driven by micro factors––and the square root of trailing 6-month % micro-driven returns.
Stocks with a wide range of analyst earnings estimates are also likely to experience above-average price swings, should the results come at either end of analysts’ expectations.
It’s a game for the brave.
Stocks Will Move Very Differently as the Economy Reopens. It’s Time to Pick the Winners.
Thanks to the coronavirus pandemic and resulting economic damage, S&P 500 stocks’ returns haven’t varied this much since the Great Recession.
