Tesla is on the verge of qualifying for inclusion in the S&P 500 index, one of the most popular stock indexes followed by investors, The Wall Street Journal first reported on Monday .
The last criterion that Tesla needs to fulfill to be considered for inclusion is profitability.
The sum of its previous four quarters of net income must be positive, with the most recent quarter also showing positive net income.
Tesla reported a profit in the past three quarters, and one more quarter of positive net income for the electric-car manufacturer would solidify its eligibility for the index.
Tesla is on the verge of satisfying the criteria to be eligible for inclusion in the S&P 500 index , based on the S&P's US indexes methodology, The Wall Street Journal first reported on Monday .
The electric-car manufacturer still doesn't meet the S&P's positive-net-income requirement.
To be eligible for inclusion in one of the most popular stock market indexes, a company needs to post a cumulative profit — as measured by generally accepted accounting principles — over its previous four quarters, with its most recent quarter also showing a profit.
Tesla has reported a net profit in its past three quarters: $143 million in the third quarter of 2019, $105 million in the fourth quarter, and $16 million in the first quarter of 2020.
Read more: Small companies are the biggest post-coronavirus battleground on Wall Street. 4 of the world's best fund managers share their strategies for the space — and the single stocks they love.
Tesla would have been eligible for inclusion now if its loss in the second quarter of 2019 had been less than $264 million, or the sum of its previous three quarters of profits. Instead, it was a $408 million loss.
If Tesla can eke out a profit in the second quarter of 2020, it would be eligible for inclusion.
If Tesla reports a loss, it might have to wait for its third-quarter results to meet the eligibility criteria.
Tesla may have to wait until then if analysts' estimates for its second-quarter earnings are accurate: Analysts surveyed by FactSet said they expected a loss of $387 million, according to The Journal.
CEO Elon Musk has been fighting to reopen Tesla's factory in Fremont, California, and ramp up production, putting immense pressure on health officials in Alameda County.
Tesla was able to get its factory back up and running on Monday. It now has six weeks left in the quarter to deliver vehicles and try to turn a profit.
If Tesla is able to post four quarters of cumulative profits and meet all eligibility requirements, it will be up to the S&P's index committee whether to add it to the S&P 500.
Tesla had a market value of $150 billion and was up more than 1%, at $810, on Monday morning.
