This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Updated April 20, 2020 8:29 am ET / Original April 20, 2020 6:30 am ET
That corporate profits will take a major hit in 2020 is a foregone conclusion. But just how far earnings will fall remains highly uncertain, requiring a plethora of unknowable and constantly changing assumptions. How fast and where the global economy reopens , whether there will be a second wave of the coronavirus in the fall, and how effective fiscal and monetary policy interventions prove are just a few of the variables that can materially change the outcome .
The most optimistic Wall Street analyst forecasts $150 in earnings per share for the S&P 500 this year, while the gloomiest estimate is for about $50. Those compare with close to $163 in earnings per share in 2019.
The 2020 uncertainty isn’t limited to Wall Street spectators. Companies’ management teams themselves are finding it a challenge to forecast their own businesses, and are pulling guidance or holding off on issuing new numbers as a result. Many companies are preparing for the worst and moving to cut costs: They’re slashing discretionary spending and capital expenditures, and reconsidering their dividend and buyback programs .
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
In 2019, S&P 500 companies paid out about $500 billion in dividends and bought back $650 billion of their own stock. J.P. Morgan ’s head of U.S. equity strategy, Dubravko Lakos-Bujas, expects those shareholder payouts to drop by 35% in 2020, after a decade of growth. He sees greater cuts to buybacks than dividends, down 45% and 20%, respectively. That’s already begun: Lakos-Bujas notes that there hasn’t been a major new buyback announcement since mid-March, and that existing programs have been reduced.
“In fact, the level of buybacks announcements (~$81B YTD) is the lowest registered since 2009 (~$16B through same period),” Lakos-Bujas writes in a recent report. “ ...Given the limited visibility into the remainder of the year and continued drive by corporates to improve balance sheets, we expect the seasonal pick-up in buyback announcements post 1Q earnings to be relatively muted.”
However, even after J.P. Morgan’s estimated 35% decline in payouts in 2020, the S&P 500’s total shareholder yield would be over 4% at its current level. That stands tall in a world of low and negative interest rates, and should keep investors favoring shares of large companies with secular growth drivers that can maintain their shareholder payouts.
“We expect investors will remain partial to companies with sustainable dividends and should continue to hold these positions as core holdings, especially in a zero rate environment, expanding central bank balance sheets, and low earnings visibility,” Lakos-Bujas writes. “ ...However, given the ongoing economic recession, it is even more important to differentiate between high vs. low quality dividends given the risk of dividend suspension and credit risk.”
To screen for companies with the most and least sustainable dividends, J.P. Morgan ranked S&P 500 dividend payers with yields of at least 1% by dividend quality, credit health, and fundamental trends.
“Dividend Quality took into consideration earnings volatility, dividend track record, and [interest-rate] sensitivity,” Lakos-Bujas wrote. “As for Credit Health, companies were ranked based on the market’s pricing of credit risk and ratings. Lastly, Fundamental Trends included ability to pay debt, balance sheet leverage, and degree of pricing power.”
Here are the 40 companies in each of J.P. Morgan’s baskets:
No surprise, there are lots of consumer staples and technology names on the sustainable list including Walmart (ticker: WMT), Procter & Gamble (PG), Microsoft (MSFT), and Apple (AAPL). Utilities NextEra Energy (NEE) and Dominion Energy (D) and telecom operators Verizon Communications (VZ) and AT&T (T) also make the list.
The unsustainable basket, meanwhile, contains plenty of energy and consumer discretionary companies: Occidental Petroleum (OXY), Haliburton (HAL), General Motors (GM), and Kohl’s (KSS). Many of the most coronavirus-sensitive travel and leisure names are on the watch list as well, including Delta Air Lines (DAL), Carnival (CCL), and Las Vegas Sands (LVS). Several have already reduced their payouts in 2020.
J.P. Morgan’s basket of stocks with sustainable dividends had outperformed its unsustainable-dividend equivalent by over 40% in 2020 through late last week. Lakos-Bujas sees potential for that to continue, as the sustainable dividend payers have historically traded at a greater premium to the rest of the market than they do now. Given the uncertain and low-rate environment, he argues that the premium should be even greater today.
That corporate profits will take a major hit in 2020 is a foregone conclusion.
