This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Updated Sept. 23, 2019 9:10 am ET / Original Sept. 23, 2019 5:30 am ET
The S&P 500 index fell below the 3000 mark Friday , and the debate over its future direction is so fractured that predictions differ drastically even among two strategists at the same firm.
Bernstein’s Inigo Fraser-Jenkins sees the S&P 500 in a range around 4000 in 10 years’ time, while his colleague Alla Harmsworth is far more bullish, predicting a range near 8000.
The benchmark index has gained 19.6% so far this year. Rate cuts from the Federal Reserve have helped the market overcome concerns over continued trade tensions between the U.S. and China.
The index is currently trading at 22.31 times trailing one-year earnings, compared with its mean of 15.76. The index’s highest price/earnings ratio occurred just over 10 years ago at 123.73 in May 2009.
In a note to clients last week, Fraser-Jenkins wrote that equities, as well as many other asset classes, appear expensive, as yields have declined for 35 years. He notes the Shiller P/E —in which price is divided by 10-year trailing inflation-adjusted earnings—stands around 29, which seems to signal a 3.4% return, including dividends, for each year in the next decade.
Though not an effective way to gauge short-term returns, he called the Shiller P/E “the best thing we’ve got” for predicting 10-year returns.
“This might sound horrible compared to what investors have become used to in the last 30 years, but we would argue that this is not at all bearish,” he wrote. “After all, it likely translates to a positive return in real terms, which is likely higher than nearly another asset class that can be bought in scale.”
He argues that the Shiller P/E and Tobin’s Q, which is price divided by the replacement cost of assets, both signal U.S. equities are fully valued.
Harmsworth points out that the Shiller P/E series had forecast sub-10% returns for most of the past 10 years. In fact, the market returned about 250%, including dividends.
Monetary or fiscal policy can override signals from the Shiller P/E model, Harmsworth contends. And given the potential threat to pension systems, politicians will have a strong motivator to keep returns chugging.
Another factor for Fraser-Jenkins’ lower return outlook is the fact that household equity allocations may have hit the top of a range. Harmsworth counters that might not matter much given the state of corporate stock buybacks, in which “the buying of equities by corporates has exceeded the selling of equities by investors 10-fold.”
Fraser-Jenkins poses a simple model for long-term real equity return: dividend yield plus real growth per capita plus population growth. Under that model, the expected real equity return would be 3.4%. If you account for the so-called yield from buybacks in the U.S., that goes up to 5.6%. He also is concerned about geopolitical risk to equities, given that the past 10 years have been characterized by quantitative easing.
“Without any expansion of profit share then the growth rate of corporate profits equals the growth rate of the economy and the profit share term falls out,” he writes. “Likewise, over long horizons we find it hard to make the case that there should be a near-permanent shift up in the market multiple.”
“Gold is often thought of as an inflation hedge, [but] this is only true to the extent that it can outperform other assets in periods of inflation,” Harmsworth writes. “In the long run it has a real return that is close to zero. Equities have been a far better inflation hedge over a long time.”
Even if Fraser-Jenkins is right about the market’s future returns, Bernstein concludes there may not be many better options than stocks for investors looking to invest in their future—be it for retirement, education, or health-care costs.
“Thus, even if returns might not be quite as high over the next 10 years as they have been over the last 40, we need a long exposure to equities as the best inflation hedge in town,” the note concludes.
The S&P 500 index fell below the 3000 mark Friday, and the debate over its future direction is so fractured that predictions differ drastically even among two strategists at the same firm.
