This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
The S&P 500 Fell Below 3000. Here Are the Next Support Levels to Watch.
The S&P 500 opened below the psychologically significant level of 3000 on Monday, adding to the losses that piled up last week and raising the question of where the market might next find support.
The next significant level to watch for the market benchmark is 2965, according to John Kolovos, chief technical market strategist at Macro Risk Advisors. If the index breaks below 2965 for an extended period, the next support is in the 2700 to 2800 point range, or about 7% to 10% below the S&P 500’s current levels.
Shortly after midday, the index was at 3,030, down 0.4% relative to Friday’s closing level, but well off the low of 2,965.66 it reached earlier. The market has come under pressure as investors have grown concerned about rising coronavirus cases both in several U.S. states and in other countries. A rally of more than 40% since late March also had conditions looking overbought and ripe for a pullback.
Last week was the worst for the index since March. The S&P 500 lost almost 6% on Thursday .
Kolovos said that while the market may be due for a correction given the run it has just had, he doesn’t expect a crash like the one that unfolded in late February and March.
“This is an old-fashioned shakeout, which is common after extended periods of gains and is needed to test the conviction of the bulls and bears alike,” Kolovos wrote in a report on Monday. “Just remember the improved market structure since the March lows via the breadth thrusts which implies using setbacks as they come opportunistically.”
Kolovos recommends viewing a near-term correction as a buying opportunity . But trading could remain bumpy as investors grapple with the impact on the economic rebound that a potential second wave of Covid-19 cases might bring.
Every weekday evening we highlight the consequential market news of the day and explain what's likely to matter tomorrow.
In the longer term, Kolovos is watching polling and betting odds for the November presidential election . They have both moved in favor of former Vice President Joe Biden in recent weeks—an outcome perceived as less favorable to the market than the re-election of President Donald Trump. But that hasn’t been reflected in the S&P 500, Kolovos said.
“The S&P 500 and the odds of a Republican victory moved in unison up until April, but since then they have diverged,” Kolovos wrote. “With the S&P relatively close to new highs while odds are at lows, something has to give...worry is that the longer odds stay down, the market will be lower.”
A lot can—and will—change between now and November. The polling data today might not be all that predictive for what the final outcome will be, and traders seem to be more focused on the second-wave potential than much else this week.
But it’s going to matter sometime. As Kolovos wrote, “something has to give.”
The S&P 500 Fell Below 3000. Here Are the Next Support Levels to Watch.
The S&P 500 opened below the psychologically significant level of 3000 on Monday, adding to the losses that piled up last week and raising the question of where the market might next find support.
