There’s a long way to go before the economy gets back to previrus levels. And considering fundamental valuation yardsticks including price-to-forward earnings, market capitalization as a percentage of gross domestic product, and equity risk premiums, the S&P 500 is about as expensive as it’s ever been, says Lisa Shalett, chief investment officer at Morgan Stanley Wealth Management.
“Now, with the S&P 500 index only 6% below the Feb. 19 all-time high, investors are rightly questioning whether the market’s latest move is sustainable or simply the reflection of a short-lived bounce off a deep and extreme trough,” Shalett says.
For now, it’s the former. The S&P 500 index’s market cap relative to a certain money supply stat, she says, suggests there is room to run.
M2 money supply—cash, checking, savings deposits, small certificates of deposit, and money-market funds—is up 22% on an annualized basis for the trailing three months, Shalett says. That, of course, is thanks to the Federal Reserve’s rapidly growing balance sheet as it responds to the coronavirus pandemic. Over the past few months, The Fed has unveiled extraordinary measures to limit the economic damage from the virus, including about $2.3 trillion in lending to support businesses, financial markets, households and state and local governments.
Fed Chairman Jerome Powell has pledged to do more, assuring investors that the central bank has more firepower and is willing to use it. To that point, the Fed on Monday said it would expand its Main Street lending program by lowering the minimum loan amount, raising the maximum loan limit, extending loan terms, and allowing businesses to defer principal payments for two years instead of one.
On the surface, the rally over the past two weeks appears to have been driven by an earlier-than-expected and smoother-than-feared gradual reopening of the economy and signs of consumer resilience, says Shalett. Aside from the surprise rise in payrolls, personal income grew 10.5% in April and the savings rate jumped to 33%. That’s as initial jobless claims, while still high, have continued their weekly decline, manufacturing surveys beat expectations, May auto sales improved, and mortgage applications increased for the seventh straight week.
Deeper down, Shalett says, Fed-driven liquidity is booming in a way that can help sustain asset prices. “All told, this strong data validates the market narrative of a V-shaped recovery,” Shalett says.
Still, Shalett expresses some caution. She calls valuations relative to real economic activity “extreme” and notes headwinds in the way of rising inflation expectations, steepening yield curves, and a weakening U.S. dollar. She expects record levels of monetary and fiscal support to backstop the S&P 500 at around 2650, but says she doesn’t advocate chasing the S&P 500’s current momentum because she sees the index range-bound for the next three to six months, capped at around 3,250.
Shalett says that while the Fed’s liquidity is a powerful market propellant, she thinks its biggest impact in the coming months will not be in supporting valuation multiples of long-duration growth stocks that now dominate the S&P 500. “Instead, that liquidity, when combined with fiscal policy and pent-up consumer demand, will likely create a powerful cyclical rebound that investors can gain exposure to through sector and stock selection,” she says, recommending investors trim index exposure and consider stock picking among quality, cash-flow leaders across small and midcaps, cyclicals, value and non-U.S. stocks.
The S&P 500 Has Erased Its 2020 Losses. The Fed’s Money Flood Suggests Room to Run.
As stocks continue to march higher, extending a rally Monday has helped the S&P 500 erase its 2020 losses, some investors are wondering if valuations are too stretched.
