The S&P    500 erased its year-to-date losses on June 8, ending the    coronavirus slump amid growing optimism for economic    recovery.
The index bottomed on March 23 after sliding 34% from    its record high on early coronavirus worries.
Since reaching that trough, the S&P 500 has rallied    on unprecedented Federal Reserve aid, optimism for a swift    rebound, and better-than-expected economic data.
Here's how all 11 of the index's sectors have performed    since hitting the March 23 floor.
On June 8, optimism for a rapid economic recovery retraced the  last of the coronavirus-fueled market slump.
A last-minute rally through Monday's session led the S&P  500 to close just above its December 31 level , erasing losses made  in the early days of the pandemic. The index slid as much as 34%  from its peak to a March 23 floor before the Federal Reserve's  announcement of unprecedented relief measures fueled a steady  run-up through April and May.
Stocks' surge over recent months hasn't been evenly shared across  sectors. Firms viewed as prime stay-at-home plays outperformed at  the start of the pandemic before sliding on hopes for a  quicker-than-expected rebound. Companies slammed hardest by the  initial outbreak soared as economic data suggested the worst was  over.
Energy firms posted some of the biggest leaps of all. After oil's  historic plunge to negative prices shocked investors around the  world, widespread production cuts and recovering demand renewed  hope for the struggling commodity.
The index's year-to-date gains lasted only a few days. US stocks nosedived on Thursday as rising coronavirus cases across the  nation and cautious messaging from the Federal Reserve revived  investor fears. The S&P 500 dropped as much as 5.5% through  the session. Yet the index's segments are still up massively from  their virus-induced lows.
Here's how all 11 S&P 500 sectors have performed since  bottoming on March 23, ranked in ascending order of gains. Data  is as of 1:55 p.m. ET Thursday.
