S&P 500 futures are gaining more than 1% in premarket trading as the economy added 4.8 million jobs in June.
The U.S. has just released new Initial Jobless Claims and Continuing Jobless Claims reports.
Initial Jobless Claims were 1.43 million, down from 1.48 million in the previous week. Analysts expected Initial Jobless Claims of 1.35 million.
Continuing Jobless Claims were mostly flat at 19.3 million. The previous reading of 19.5 million was revised to 19.23 million. The analyst consensus called for Continuing Jobless Claims of 19 million.
Both reports were a bit worse than expected but S&P 500 futures have increased their gains during the premarket trading session as other employment reports have easily beaten expectations.
In June, Unemployment Rate was 11.1% compared to analyst consensus of 12.3%. In May, Unemployment Rate was 13.3%, so the situation has materially improved.
Non Farm Payrolls report showed that the economy added 4.8 million jobs in June. Before the release, analysts expected that Non Farm Payrolls will total 3 million.
The Non Farm Payrolls report is much better than expected and is set to provide additional support to the market. Today, stocks have a very good chance to build upside momentum on optimism about the recovery.
The recent EIA Weekly Petroleum Status Report showed that U.S. crude oil inventories declined by 7.2 million barrels. Initially, this report failed to provide additional support to the oil market, and WTI oil continued to trade below the $40 level.
However, the optimism about the global economic recovery is increasing, and oil is once again trying to get above $40 and gain more upside momentum.
Major oil stocks like Exxon Mobil, Chevron, BP, Royal Dutch Shell have been under pressure for several weeks as investors started to question long-term perspectives of big oil after BP and Shell signaled that they will make huge writedowns due to changes in outlook for oil and gas.
In case oil manages to get more momentum above $40, traders will likely focus on near-term recovery and provide support to oil-related stocks, pushing S&P 500 to higher levels.
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
