Wait for these 3 indicators before buying the S&P 500, says Canaccord’s Dwyer
The major U.S. stock indexes have risen more than 20% from their March 23 lows, despite weakness Monday and Tuesday this week, as investors remain confident that the worst of the coronavirus epidemic is behind the global economy and unprecedented intervention by the Federal Reserve will keep asset prices high.
But Tony Dwyer, equity strategist at Canaccord Genuity cautions investors that they may want to wait for prices to fall significantly lower before buying in to a U.S. stock market amid an ongoing fight against COVID-19.
“Just like the market discounted too much bad news on the crash, it likely has discounted too much good news on the relief rally,” he wrote in a Monday note to clients. “We do not want to fight a Fed that is already buying high yield corporate and municipal debt, but ultimately, we need to see a better indication the economy is nearing the end of the recession in order to add exposure after such a significant relief rally.”
Since March 23, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has gained 23.8% DJIA,
is up 26.2% and the Nasdaq Composite index COMP,
Dwyer argued that this surge was catalyzed foremost by a Federal Reserve pledge to backstop corporate credit markets, including debt issued by riskier firms, with such promises giving investors confidence that the U.S. economy will remain in a holding pattern until restrictions aimed at slowing the spread of COVID-19 can be lifted in earnest.
“The hope is that once we reopen the economy there should be a V-shaped recovery that could drive stocks even higher as the economy and earnings per share recover,” he wrote. “Although there has been an improvement in the tone of corporate credit since that Fed action, we want to highlight a few credit indicators that suggest an economic and market ‘V’ call may be too early.”
First, he argued, the “US Treasury yield curve remains too flat.” The yield curve, or the spread between the yield on the 2-year U.S. Treasury note and the 10-year note has long been an indicator of coming economic weakness or economic recovery, with the spread narrowing or even inverting before recessions and steepening before recoveries.
The spread “remains well below the spread at either [previous stock-market lows] or ends of recessions,” Dwyer wrote.
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
The second indicator Dwyer is watching is the 26-week rate of change in business loan demand, which spiked by 17.3% in the week ended April 17. This rate of change “has been truly historic and likely marks the beginning of a recession,” he wrote, adding that business loan demand typically  drops sharply just before the beginning of an economic recovery.
Finally, he pointed to the Chicago Federal Reserve’s National Financial Conditions Index, which compiles 105 measures of financial activity to gauge the overall availability of credit to businesses. While recent Fed has stressed its willingness to engage in extraordinary action to support bond markets, credit conditions continue to grow more restrictive by this measure.
“On April 9 the Fed showed they were willing to do what it takes to prevent a full-blown credit crisis  that largely takes the worst case-scenario off the table,” when it announced it would lend to businesses across the U.S. economy, including companies that borrow in the riskier high yield market, Dwyer argued.
“That said, we are still in an economy that is largely shut down, businesses are going to reopen slowly and our favored credit indicators suggest it is too early to price in the end of the recession.”
