U.S. gross domestic product, the broadest measure of goods and services produced in the economy, fell at a 4.8 percent annual rate in the first quarter of the year, the Commerce Department said Wednesday. That is the first decline since 2014, and the worst quarterly contraction since the country was in a deep recession more than a decade ago.
Even so, most of the quarter came before the coronavirus pandemic forced widespread shutdowns and layoffs. Economists expect figures from the current quarter to show G.D.P. contracting at an annual rate of 30 percent or more.
“They’re going to be the worst in our lifetime,” said Dan North, chief economist for the credit insurance company Euler Hermes North America.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said this week that the economy should “ really bounce back ” this summer as states lift stay-home orders and trillions of dollars in federal emergency spending reaches businesses and households. Most independent economists are much less optimistic.
The estimates made public on Wednesday are preliminary and based on incomplete data, particularly for March. Some economists expect final figures, due later this spring, to show an even bigger decline.
Hertz discloses a missed monthly payment on its rental fleet.
Hertz Global Holdings said in a regulatory filing Wednesday that it had missed a monthly payment on the lease it used to procure cars for its rental-car fleet.
The company said its business had been battered by the global pandemic, and it had skipped Monday’s payment to preserve cash for its core operations.
Hertz did not disclose the amount of the missed payment, but said it was in a grace period that would end on May 4.
The company was dealing with a significant decline in travel demand, said Lauren Luster, a Hertz spokeswoman. “Conversations with our lenders are ongoing and we remain in discussions with the U.S. Treasury for support,” she said.
In its filing, the company said it was talking with two groups of lenders about temporarily reducing the lease payments. One group of lenders, the holders of its vehicle-financing subsidiary’s notes, had already agreed to such a reduction, the company said. But the other group, described as its senior credit facility lenders, had not.
If Hertz cannot reach an agreement with the second group by May 4, the company could be forced into bankruptcy.
The Treasury secretary says he doesn’t want to lose money on bailouts.
If the economic recovery plays out as he expects, the federal government will not suffer deep losses on the loans, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said.Credit...Alex Brandon/Associated Press
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on Wednesday that he hoped to not lose money on the Federal Reserve lending facilities that the Treasury is supporting with its $454 billion bailout fund.
If the economic recovery plays out as he expects, the federal government will not suffer deep losses on the loans.
Mr. Mnuchin has faced criticism from some businesses for not working with the Federal Reserve to deploy the bailout fund more aggressively and for having an aversion to taking credit losses. In a virtual briefing with reporters on Zoom, Mr. Mnuchin said that he was reserving about half of the money so that he had ammunition to stabilize markets if necessary in the coming months.
“I think it’s pretty clear if Congress wanted me to lose all of the money, that money would have been designed as subsidies and grants as opposed to credit support,” Mr. Mnuchin said.
The Treasury secretary said that he was not looking at the loans from the perspective of a pension or private equity fund seeking high return, but that in the best-case scenario, the government would recover its money from the loans. However, he said there was considerable uncertainty.
“There’s plenty of scenarios where we lose all of our money,” he said. “There also could be scenarios where the world turns out better and we make money.”
Here are the other big companies that reported earnings today.
Boeing employees during a shift change at the plant in Renton, Wash., on Tuesday.Credit...Ruth Fremson/The New York Times
The deluge of first-quarter reports this week is giving investors a detailed look at how the start of the coronavirus crisis affected businesses. Of course, second-quarter earnings this year may well be even more grim.
Facebook cautioned Wall Street that it could face intensifying difficulties in its advertising business as the spread of the coronavirus ripples through the global economy, although the falloff in spending has stabilized. The company’s revenue in the first quarter rose 18 percent to $17.74 billion from a year earlier, while profit more than doubled to $4.9 billion, surpassing Wall Street estimates. A year earlier, Facebook had taken a $3 billion charge to pay for a privacy settlement with the Federal Trade Commission.
Microsoft reported strong growth in sales and profits for the quarter ended in March, saying that the coronavirus outbreak had “minimal net impact” on its financial performance. Revenue rose 15 percent to $35 billion, compared with the analysts’ consensus forecast of $33.66 billion. Its operating earnings per share rose 23 percent to $1.40 a share in the quarter. That was well above the average estimate of Wall Street analysts of $1.26 a share, as compiled by Refinitiv, a research firm.
Boeing reported $16.9 billion of revenue in the first quarter of the year, a 26 percent decline from last year, as the aviation industry ground to a halt during the coronavirus pandemic. The company said Wednesday that it planned to cut its work force by about 10 percent, a reduction it hopes to achieve voluntarily, through buyouts and early retirement offers.
General Electric said Wednesday that overall revenue fell 8 percent to $20.5 billion in the first quarter of the year. The coronavirus pandemic especially affected the aviation division, which saw a 13 percent decline. But the health care sector of the business, which doubled its production of ventilators and increased its manufacturing of other medical equipment used in the diagnosis and treatment of Covid-19, saw revenue increase by 7 percent, to $5.3 billion.
The restaurant giant Yum Brands said on Wednesday that same-store sales across its brands had dropped 7 percent in the first quarter. Sales at K.F.C. shrank 8 percent, while Pizza Hut sales dropped 11 percent. But sales at Taco Bell — which has been offering drive-through service throughout the pandemic — rose 1 percent.
Airbus, the European aircraft giant, reported on Wednesday a net loss of 481 million euros (about $522 million) in the first quarter of 2020, a reversal from a profit of 40 million euros in the same period a year ago. The company said that it delivered 122 commercial aircraft compared with 162 in the first quarter of 2019.
Volkswagen , the world’s largest carmaker, said that vehicle sales fell 25 percent in the first three months of the year, a vivid indication of the havoc that the coronavirus is causing throughout the auto industry. The company, based in Wolfsburg, Germany, said that it sold 1.9 million vehicles in the first quarter compared with 2.6 million in the first quarter of 2019. Profit also collapsed, falling more than 80 percent to 517 million euros, or $562 million.
Catch up: Here’s what else is happening.
FedEx said on Wednesday that it would not take federal funds earmarked to pay employees under the CARES Act, one day after UPS announced the same. Lawmakers had set aside $25 billion in grants for passenger airlines and $4 billion for cargo carriers to pay workers, though the Treasury Department later classified a portion of the funds for airlines as a loan.
Tyson Foods said on Wednesday that it was doubling bonuses, to a total of $120 million, for its 116,000 front-line workers and truck drivers in the United States. The company also said it was increasing short-term disability coverage for employees unable to work because of illness and putting additional health screening measures into place.
Lyft plans to lay off 17 percent of its employees, the company said in a regulatory filing, as the ride-hailing company struggles with a downturn caused by the coronavirus pandemic. The company told staff about the cuts in an email on Wednesday. Five percent of workers will be furloughed, and remaining employees will take a pay cut. Executive pay will be reduced 30 percent, pay for vice presidents will be reduced 20 percent, and pay for other workers will be reduced 10 percent.
Volkswagen said on Wednesday that it would not restart production at its plant in Chattanooga, Tenn., on May 3, a date it announced just a week earlier. The German automaker did not provide a new start date, and said in a statement that it would first “weigh the readiness of the supplier base, as well as market demand and the status of the Covid-19 outbreak.”
Reporting was contributed by Alan Rappeport, Mary Williams Walsh Steve Lohr, Taylor Lorenz, Ben Casselman, Jaclyn Peiser, Stanley Reed, Jack Ewing, Ben Dooley, Keith Bradsher, Alan Rappeport, Jeanna Smialek, David Yaffe-Bellany, Jason Karaian, Kate Conger, Mike Isaac, Tara Siegel-Bernard, Neal E. Boudette, Michael Corkery, Sapna Maheshwari, Gregory Schmidt, Mohammed Hadi, Katie Robertson, Carlos Tejada, Mike Ives and Kevin Granville.
