Investing in ELSS to save taxes? You have to pay more now to get full tax benefit
The fund will provide Indian investors exposure to the performance of leading 500 companies listed in the United States. The S&P 500 Index covers approximately 80 per cent of the available market. In 2018, more than 40 per cent of the sales of S&P 500 constituents were reported from foreign countries.
As per the fund house, the NAV for the fund will be a combination of two data points – 1) End of the day share price. This will be as of US previous day close price. 2) Exchange rate: This will be as of 5 pm the same day. The NAV will be declared post-market hours (just like any other mutual fund).
As far as the taxation is concerned, although, the investment is in the equities, as per the tax laws in India, all International mutual funds attract taxation of non-Indian equity investments, i.e. debt taxation. The investor may, therefore, take Indexation benefit post three years on the investment. Importantly, as the investments are made in Indian Rupees, the investment in Motilal Oswal S&P 500 index fund does not come under the LRS scheme.
Motilal Oswal S&P 500 index fund is not a feeder fund and neither a fund of funds and will have an expense ratio of 1 per cent for regular plans while it will be 0.5 per cent for direct plans.
Currently, the global economies are undergoing major meltdown and the full impact of COVID-19 pandemic is yet to be seen. IMF has recently forecast that the US may see a dip in GDP growth by almost 5.9 per cent while the global GDP growth may fall by about 3 per cent. Investors who wish to diversify in US stocks may consider investing if their risk profile allows after consulting their financial advisors.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
