Where will the S&P 500 go in 2020? Here are the most bullish and bearish strategists
Piper Jaffray’s Craig Johnson ranks as the biggest bull, Morgan Stanley’s Wilson leads the bears
With Christmas rapidly approaching, Wall Street investors are turning their attention to 2020 and what the new year will bring for the stock market.
In the wake of a limited U.S.-China trade deal,  the S&P 500 index SPX,
and the Nasdaq Composite index COMP,
remain on track to post their best calendar-year performances since 2013, with the Dow up 21%, the S&P 27% and the Nasdaq nearly 33%.
And while there are a range of views regarding the performance of U.S. equities in the year to come, the top strategists on Wall Street unanimously agree that next year’s performance will come nowhere near that of 2019, with only one of those surveyed by MarketWatch predicting the S&P 500 will rise 10% next year from Monday’s close, while a few are predicting year-over-year declines in the large-cap index.
In recent days, Julian Emanuel, chief equity and derivatives strategist at BTIG and Craig Johnson, senior technical research analyst at Piper Jaffray have come out with bullish calls for the S&P 500 index, with Johnson issuing a 3,600 target and Emmanuel a 3,450 prediction, to rank as the first and second most optimistic in MarketWatch’s survey. Canaccord Genuity equity strategist Tony Dwyer and CFRA’s Sam Stovall, who had been in the top two spots, now rank as third and fourth most bullish, respectively.
Johnson wrote in recent note that equity prices have been supported by progress on U.S - China trade relations and by Federal Reserve monetary policy which has soothed markets with three interest rate cuts in 2019 and signalled  it won’t be raising rates soon.  His 3,600 target implies a 12.8% gain for the S&P 500 next year, from Monday’s close.
“In addition, the Fed Chair has reiterated the Powell put is still in play by stating the FOMC ‘would respond accordingly’ if the economy deviates from their economic baseline of moderate economic growth, a robust labor market, and inflation near 2%,” Johnson wrote. “We believe the perceived Fed backstop, coupled with a positive sloping yield curve, will continue to support U.S. equities next year.”
Johnson also pointed to internal market factors for his optimism. “A rotation from safe-havens into risk assets has helped drive most major averages back to new record highs,” he wrote.  “Large-caps and growth have held on to their leadership credentials, but participation has broadened out into cyclical sectors along with value and smaller-cap stocks.”
BTIG’s Emanuel argued that in an election year, “growth will be driven by emerging clarity on trade and Brexit as politicians realize that growth is a vital requisite for their staying in power.”
He also pointed to a trend in zero-fee commissions for online brokerages as a reason stocks will move higher next year. “S&P 500 upside to 3,950 is possible if zero fee trading fuels public participation consistent with the “late innings” of all great bull markets,” he argued. His baseline  target of 3,450 implies an 8.1% increase for the S&P 500 next year.
Read more: Here are the most accurate S&P 500 predictions of the year, so far
Once again , Morgan Stanley’s Michael Wilson is the most bearish strategist surveyed, with a base case that the S&P 500 falls to 3,000 by the end of next year. “Easier monetary policy and trade stabilization will help global growth accelerate, but only stabilize GDP growth in the US at 1.8%, leaving pressure on corporate margins from tight labor markets,” he wrote in a note to clients.
He argued that central bank stimulus may keep stock prices elevated in the near term, “but by April, the liquidity tailwind will fade and the market will focus more on fundamentals, where uncertainty is higher than normal.”
Wilson believes that profit margin headwinds and sluggish U.S. economic growth will keep earnings gains nearly non-existent, as has been the case in 2019, while international trade and policy uncertainty will keep a lid on equity valuations. Better growth prospects abroad “and cheaper valuations means we prefer non-U.S. equities to the U.S.,” he wrote.
UBS’ Francois Trahan also has a target of 3,000 on the S&P 500 for the coming year, driven by what he predicts will be an earnings recession — or two or more consecutive quarters of declines in S&P 500 earnings.
“Directly in front of us, we see S&P 500 forward earnings falling and expect them to remain under pressure for several quarters,” Trahan wrote in a recent 2020 outlook note. He said that earnings declines in small cap stocks are presaging what will happen to large caps as a slowing of economic growth, which began in 2019, continues next year.
