Kris Knutson | June 13, 2020 | More on: PAAS AEM AEM PAAS
After the run-up in certain gold stocks, I decided to sell a few of my favourite names. These stocks have come back a bit, making me wonder whether I should get back in at these levels. I still see upside in gold, especially if central bankers’ plans don’t go as well as they should.
If anything, the drastic one-day fall on June 11 should make investors nervous about the possibility of more downside and economic instability in the coming months.
The case to buy precious metals is known by most investors at the moment. Global governments are printing money at an alarming rate. Ultimately, the theory is that this will lead to inflation as money is worth less over time due to increased supply over time.
Debt is making the financial system more fragile, and people are looking for safety to preserve wealth.
However, even with the bullish outlook behind gold, that doesn’t necessarily mean that gold miners are good buys at this level. While the stocks are leveraged ways to play a rise in gold prices, they aren’t sure-fire wins.
Besides, the fact that everyone knows there is a bullish case for gold may mean that the upside is already in the stocks.
The two best gold stocks to own, in my opinion, are Agnico Eagle Mines Ltd. (TSX:AEM) (NYSE:AEM) and Pan American Silver Silver Corp (TSX:PAAS) (NYSE:PAAS).
Both of these companies have massive operations spanning multiple jurisdictions. Agnico has mines throughout North and South America, as does Pan American. They both have operations in Canada, receiving a portion of their revenue at home.
Pan American has the largest silver reserve base globally, with 557 million ounces of silver and 5.6 million ounces of gold. Agnico has 2.7 million of proven gold reserves and more that is yet to be discovered.
With prices increasing, both companies are increasing production, which will increase their earnings considerably in the coming months. Both companies benefit from a lower Canadian dollar, considering they sell their product in USD and convert to Canadian.
Both Agnico and Pan American pay a small dividend, although you don’t buy gold stocks for their yield alone. Nevertheless, the 1.2% yield offered by Agnico Eagle and the 0.77% dividend from Pan American are an excellent consolation prize while you wait for the stocks to move further.
I really like both of these stocks. Over the past year, they have been excellent stocks to hold. The question is whether or not they are still worth buying at this level. Their operations are good; after all, they have dividends, and there is still the possibility of uncertainty in the future.
These stocks are some of the best in the business, with limited exposure to geopolitical risks.
Much of the optimism about further profitability was built into the stock price when they shot up a few weeks ago. I sold my stocks and am looking for a chance to get back in.
The pullback gives investors a chance to build a position at a lower level. If you want to add gold to your portfolio, now is as good a time as any to start.
If you want to get rich, check this out.
Looking for the Next Potential Netflix? We’ve Got You Covered with These 3 Free Stock Picks
Motley Fool Canada's market-beating team has just released a new FREE report that gives our three recommendations for the Next Gen Revolution.
Click on the link below for our stock recommendations that we believe could battle Netflix for entertainment dominance.
Fool contributor Kris Knutson has no position in any of the stocks mentioned.
Two New Stock Picks Every Month!
Not to alarm you, but you’re about to miss an important event.
Iain Butler and the Stock Advisor Canada team only publish their new “buy alerts” twice a month, and only to an exclusively small group.
This is your chance to get in early on what could prove to be very special investment advice.
Enter your email address below to get started now, and join the other thousands of Canadians who have already signed up for their chance to get the market-beating advice from Stock Advisor Canada.
I consent to receiving information from The Motley Fool via email, direct mail, and occasional special offer phone calls. I understand I can unsubscribe from these updates at any time. Please read the Privacy Statement and Terms of Service for more information.
