Give me my free report!
On the same note, Preston described the current situation as a “perfect storm” for gold, saying that there are three main reasons she thinks that’s the case: gold always bottoms first in crises; infinite money printing and negative real rates are bullish for gold; and finally, miners are making money at the current gold price, meaning their performance should only improve as interest in the yellow metal grows.
While all four speakers expressed optimism about gold’s future, they also emphasized that it won’t be a smooth path forward for the precious metal.
Lundin, who is the editor of Gold Newsletter, reminded the audience that gold saw “very significant volatility” in the initial stages of the 2008 crash, rising precipitously one day only to fall the next.
“That was a phase that the metal went through that was a liquidity crunch — a liquidity crisis within the greater financial crisis,” he said, explaining that market participants wanted or needed to go to cash and as a result were selling “anything that wasn’t nailed down,” including gold.
“We’ve had a liquidity crunch, we’ve seen the gold price plummet and rebound and plummet again — we’ve seen that kind of volatility,” he continued. “The point here I think is that we shouldn’t be disheartened by this kind of volatility in gold.”
Why? According to Lundin, in 2008 it wasn’t long before investors started to pay attention to monetary stimulus from central banks. “The result was that over the next couple of years gold more than doubled in price … and mining shares by and large leveraged those gains,” he commented.
For Preston, the path forward for investors is to make a plan and keep to it. “If you’re an investor (and not a day trader), you should develop a plan for how and what to enter based on your broad outlook, and then you should execute that plan,” she said. “That alleviates you from the stress — from worrying about these daily ups and downs.”
She added, “(gold) is a tiny sector … prices really rise when generalist dollars arrive … So precious metals and precious metals stocks will shine, but I think each person just has to really come up with a plan for how they want to participate in this, and then really stick to that plan.”
Metals Investor Forum also recently held a webinar featuring Joe Mazumdar, co-editor of Exploration Insights — click here to learn what he said.
Don’t forget to follow us @INN_Resource for real-time updates!
Securities Disclosure: I, Charlotte McLeod, hold no direct investment interest in any company mentioned in this article.
