SmallCapPower | May 6, 2020: Gold ‘bugs’ are gearing up for potentially a great couple of years for the gold price given the record amount of global monetary stimulus related to COVID-19. Not surprising, then, the junior gold stocks we’ve sifted through and found are standing out due to their upward momentum.
*Returns are based on closing stock prices as of May 5, 2020
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Wesdome Gold Mines explores for, extracts, processes, reclaims, and sells gold in Canada. It produces principally gold in the form of doré bars, and silver as a by-product. WDO boasts over 30 years of continuous gold production and the Company’s principal assets include the Eagle River Mine, which consists of three contiguous mining leases and 442 contiguous active mining claims covering an area of 7,958 hectares; the Mishi Mine that consists of 19 patented mining claims, five mining leases, and five staked claims covering an area of 3,055 hectares; and the Eagle River Mill located near Wawa. During 2019, Wesdome Gold Mines saw a 28% increase in production along with a 9% decrease in cash costs over 2018. With most of its mining infrastructure already built, Wesdome can easily triple production without incurring significant additional capex costs, making the Company an attractive takeover target for a large-cap miner. On May 5, 2020, Wesdome Gold Mines announced that it generated $16.7 million in free cash flow during the first quarter of 2020.
Calibre Mining is a gold-focused producer in Nicaragua with two operating mines and several exploration projects. Calibre announced the acquisition of El Limon and La Libertad, the two Nicaraguan operating assets from B2Gold, in July 2019 for US$100 million. These assets have produced more than 1.4 million ounces of gold since 2010. On April 16, 2020, Calibre Mining announced first-quarter 2020 gold production of 42,085 ounces in addition to US$43 million in cash on hand at quarter end.
Troilus Gold is focused on the mineral expansion and potential mine re-start of the former gold and copper Troilus mine in Quebec. Its most recent resource estimate (November 2019) showed 4.71 million Indicated gold equivalent ounces at 0.92 g/t along with 1.76 million Inferred gold equivalent ounces at 1.04 g/t. The Company has 2.5 million ounces open pit and another 3.5 million ounces underground with several miles of on strike unexplored claims. On April 21, 2020, Troilus Gold reports additional results from the 6,000 metre drill program at its 100%-owned Troilus property in Quebec, which included 1.56 g/t gold equivalent over 73 metres.
Disclosure: Neither the author nor his family own shares in any of the companies mentioned above.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
