An escalation in US-China trade tensions is steadying the price of gold as many investors still prefer its safe-haven appeal over stocks. However, with many shares sporting cheap valuations, this may be an opportune time to invest in the FTSE 100. If you have £3k to invest and are considering your options, I think the stock market could be a wise place to put your funds.
The price of gold has generally been rising since October. The economic uncertainty that a looming Brexit brought to Britain in 2019 pushed the price of gold up steadily. The economic fallout from the coronavirus then compounded this.
So, is gold as an investment a viable option? I think it is a sensible addition to a diversified portfolio of assets; however, I do not think it wise to put all your savings into gold. The gold price falls as soon as positive sentiment towards recession recovery emerges. Besides, history has taught us that those brave stock market investors buying shares during periods of uncertainty reap the rewards over more cautious investors.
Is the stock market crashing?
Since the 23 March stock market crash, investors have been watching with bated breath for a repeat of the same. Although volatility has been apparent, the FTSE 100 and FTSE 250 have generally been heading north. None of us yet know the full extent of the financial fallout from the coronavirus pandemic, so the stock market may well fall again. With employment declining fast, severe market contractions are increasingly likely.
A downturn is undoubtedly a scary time to invest in stocks, but it can prove to be the most lucrative. Buying stocks low and selling high is the key to successful stock picking. But for value investors, the crucial factor is to buy and hold for many years. Holding for the long term means riding out the storm and ignoring fluctuations by assuring yourself that the companies you own shares in are quality businesses that will go the distance with growth and recovery.
So, if that is the case, which stocks look cheap right now?  The most obvious sectors to look for cheap stocks are those that have been the hardest hit by the pandemic. Therefore, airlines, hospitality, and tourism are all prime targets. However, as the economic future of these industries remains uncertain, these are sectors that still carry an element of risk.
One cheap FTSE 100 share I still like the look of is BAE Systems (LSE:BA) . BAE is a defence stock and supplier to both the UK Ministry of Defence and the US Department of Defense. The BAE share price is now below £5, down from a high of £6.70 earlier this year. It has a price-to-earnings ratio of 10 and earnings per share are 46p.
Along with the coronavirus pandemic, the world is still contending with the US-China trade war, Brexit, and oil production disputes, all of which heighten geopolitical tensions. Therefore, I imagine government spending on defence is unlikely to decrease. The company suspended its final 2019 dividend, in response to the disruption caused by the pandemic. However, BAE has access to a £2bn revolving credit facility, is expected to complete two acquisitions, and is focussed on increasing orders. I think its share price will recover.
If you would like to invest your £3k in stocks with big capital gains potential, we may just be able to help you with that...
It contains details of a UK-listed company our Motley Fool UK analysts are extremely enthusiastic about.
They think it’s offering an incredible opportunity to grow your wealth over the long term – at its current price – regardless of what happens in the wider market.
Because they believe it’s working both with the market… And against it.
Click here to get access to our presentation, and learn how to get the name of this 'double agent'!
Kirsteen has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
