SmallCapPower | January 17, 2020: The Carlin Trend is a geologic feature in northeastern Nevada where a tectonic crustal block called a terrane is moving into the North American Plate. The friction between the collision of the two plates produces hot springs along the structural zone. The hot springs bring dissolved minerals such as gold and silver to the surface, precipitating then out through the cracks in the plates. As a result, the Carlin Trend is one of the world’s richest gold mining districts (Source: Wikipedia). Today we have discovered six gold stocks exploring for gold and silver in the prolific Carlin Trend.
*Share price data as at January 15, 2020, data obtained from S&P Capital IQ
Leave this field empty if you're human:
Gold Standard is a gold exploration company focused on properties in Nevada. The Company’s flagship property is the Railroad-Pinion project covering approximately 53,769 gross acres of land in Elko County, Nevada. Gold Standard owns ~30,000 gross acres of mineral rights in the form of patented or unpatented mineral lode; and ~23,500 gross acres mineral rights secured.
Fremont Gold is a gold exploration company. The Company’s principal projects include the North Carlin property, which consists of 12 unpatented lode mining claims located in Elko County, Nevada; the Hurricane project comprising six unpatented mineral claims situated in Lander County, Nevada and; the Gold Canyon project, which include 26 unpatented lode mining claims covering an area of approximately 186 hectares located in Eureka County, Nevada.
Crestview Exploration engages in the acquisition and exploration of the mineral properties in North America. It intends to identify and develop economic precious and base metals properties. The Company is developing the Rock Creek Project that comprises 72 unpatented lode mining claims located in Elko County, Nevada. On January 16, 2020, CRS stock jumped 22% after the Company confirmed two important gold targets at its Rock Creek Project.
Contact Gold is a gold exploration company engaged in the acquisition, exploration, and development of mineral properties in Nevada and Canada. The Company’s flagship project is the Pony Creek property, which comprises 1,315 claims covering 107 square kilometers. It also holds interest in the Dixie Flats property, which includes 324 unpatented mining claims covering 27.1 square kilometers; and the North Star property that comprises 56 unpatented mining claims covering 4.68 square kilometers situated in western Elko County, Nevada. On January 14, 2019, Contact Gold reported drill results highlighted by 1.68 g/t Au over 35m in Green Springs.
Dynasty Gold is a junior gold explorer. The Company owns a 100% interest in the Golden Repeat property that includes 49 claims totaling 980 acres located in northwestern Elko County, Nevada; and a 70% interest in the Hatu Qi-2 gold resource property located in the Xinjiang Province of China. Dynasty Gold Corp. also has an option agreement to earn a 100% interest in the Thundercloud gold property located on the central Wabigoon greenstone belt in western Ontario.
NV Gold is a junior exploration company with mineral properties in the United States and Switzerland. The Company explores for gold, silver, and precious metals deposits. NVX holds interests in 11 exploration projects in Nevada, as well as an AngloGold-Ashanti database, in addition to Swiss Permits that cover an area of approximately 224 square kilometers situated within the Communes of Medel/Lucmagn, Disentis/Muster, and Sumvitg in Canton Graubunden, and southeastern Switzerland.
To read our full disclosure, please click on the button below:
The Content contained on this page (including any facts, views, opinions, recommendations, description of, or references to, products or securities) made available by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research is for information purposes only and is not tailored to the needs or circumstances of any particular person. Any mention of a particular security is merely a general discussion of the merits and risks associated there with and is not to be used or construed as an offer to sell, a solicitation of an offer to buy, or an endorsement, recommendation, or sponsorship of any entity or security by SmallCapPower/Ubika Research. The Reader should apply his/her own judgment in making any use of any Content, including, without limitation, the use of any information contained therein as the basis for any conclusions. The Reader bears responsibility for his/her own investment research and decisions. Before making any investment decision, it is strongly recommended that you seek outside advice from a qualified investment advisor. SmallCapPower/Ubika Research does not provide or guarantee any financial, legal, tax, or accounting advice or advice regarding the suitability, profitability, or potential value of any particular investment, security, or information source. Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees may from time to time acquire, hold or sell securities and/or commodities and/or commodity futures contracts in certain underlying companies mentioned in this site and which may also be clients of Ubika’s affiliates. In such instances, Ubika and/or its affiliates and/or their respective officers, directors or employees will use all reasonable efforts to avoid engaging in activities that would lead to conflicts of interest and Ubika and/or its affiliates will use all reasonable efforts to comply with conflicts of interest disclosures and regulations to minimize the conflict.
