Guest(s): Peter Marrone Executive Chairman, Yamana Gold
With gold prices having breached the $1,700 an ounce level and sustained upwards momentum, investors should look to buy not only the bullion, but also gold equities, whose share prices have not yet priced in these higher gold levels, according to Peter Marrone, executive chairman of Yamana Gold.
“This is one of those situations where one should be less cautious, and one should be invested in the gold sector, but more than gold as a metal. I think one should be invested in gold equities,” Marrone told Kitco News. “While gold prices have gone to these levels, in excess of $1,700, today almost touching $1,800 per ounce, it seems to me that gold equities are not reflecting - in terms of their value and share price – they’re not reflecting that gold price.” (show less)
With gold prices having breached the $1,700 an ounce level and sustained upwards momentum, investors should look to buy not only the bullion, but also gold equities, whose share prices have not yet priced in these higher gold levels, according to Peter Marrone, executive chairman of Yamana Gold.
“This is one of those situations where one should be less cautious, and one should be invested in the gold sector, but more than gold as a metal. I think one should be ... (read more)
Your browser does not support inline frames or is currently configured not to display inline frames. Content can be viewed at actual source page: /news/video/latest?show=Mines--Money-Online-Connect-2020.
In response to COVID 19, Mines & Money is launching a brand new virtual event series. Mines and Money Online Connect will be the same high quality Mines and Money events that you know well, now in a virtual and online format.
Disclaimer: The content on this website, including, without limitation, news, videos, interviews and commentaries, is provided by Kitco Metals Inc. ("Kitco") for informational purposes only and is not intended as any form of advice, whether legal, accounting, investment, financial or tax advice. Therefore, it cannot be relied upon as such. Should you require such advice, contact a licensed professional. The content provided herein is provided on an "as is" basis without any warranty of any kind, whether express or implied and your use of the information provided in said content is entirely at your own risk. In no event will Kitco be held liable for any indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages arising out of the use of the content on this website.
