By Mark Gray 8:15am PDT, Jun 29, 2020
Arnold Schwarzenegger is a bodybuilding icon, and Gold's Gym in Venice, California, is a bodybuilding mecca. It's also been Arnold's gym for years… until now. According to TMZ, the "Terminator" star went to the gym for a morning workout on June 16, which was one of the first days that gyms were able to reopen amid the coronavirus pandemic . While Arnold was wearing a mask upon entering, he noticed that several gym members in the middle of their workouts were not wearing masks. Front desk staff informed Arnold that people were required to wear face coverings when they entered and when they were in certain common areas but that the law doesn't require them to wear masks when they're actually working out. Arnold quickly left . The former California governor "will stay clear of Gold's until people start wearing masks on the floor — or when there's a vaccine," TMZ explained. On June 18, Gold's said it wouldn't change its policy, but completely supported Arnold's decision .
June was not a good month for Lea Michele. On June 1, the actress tweeted her support for the Black Lives Matter movement but after doing so, Samantha Marie Ware, who appeared alongside Lea on "Glee," called out the actress for making her time on the set "a living hell." In the days that followed, others who've worked with Lea, including actor-musician Dabier, piled on. "GIRL YOU WOULDNT LET ME SIT AT THE TABLE WITH THE OTHER CAST MEMBERS CAUSE 'I DIDNT BELONG THERE," he tweeted. Heather Morris said Lea was "unpleasant" to work with on "Glee." Lea's "Spring Awakening" co-star Gerard Canonico said she was "nothing but a nightmare" to work with and made him feel like he "didn't belong there." "The Real Housewives of New York City" alum Aviva Drescher wasn't surprised by the negative feelings, saying Lea was once "very unkind" to her. Matthew Morrison, perhaps tellingly, avoided speaking about Lea's alleged diva allegations . Amid the on-set behavior implications, Hello Fresh dropped Lea as a spokeswoman. Lea responded to the claims on June 3, saying she's now realized her actions hurt people. "Whether it was my privileged position and perspective that caused me to be perceived as insensitive or inappropriate at times or whether it was just my immaturity and me just being unnecessarily difficult, I apologize for my behavior and for any pain which I have caused," she tweeted. "We all can grow and change and I have definitely used these past several months to reflect on my own shortcomings." The apology didn't work, as many branded it a "non-apology."
Voices are being heard. Like thousands of Americans, celebrities near and far spoke out against police brutality throughout the month in the wake of George Floyd's death in Minneapolis on May 25. Stars such as Jamie Foxx , Ariana Grande, Ben Affleck, Ana de Armas, Kristen Stewart, John Boyega, Emily Ratajkowski, Norman Reedus and so many others participated in peaceful Black Lives Matter protests and demonstrations in Los Angeles, New York City and London. Some celebrities got caught up in more chaotic situations. Halsey, Madison Beer and Porsha Williams said they were tear gassed at protests they attended. John Cusack said police came at him with batons while he documented protests in Chicago. Cole Sprouse and Jaime King said they were arrested at protests in LA. "Insecure" actor  Kendrick Sampson said he was hit by rubber bullets at a demonstration. Several celebrities including Chrissy Teigen, Seth Rogen, Drake and more offered money to bail out protesters who'd been arrested. Meanwhile others expressed themselves in the media or on social media. JAY-Z took out full-page ads dedicated to George in newspapers across the country. Hundreds, if not thousands, of celebrities participated in June 2's Instagram "Black Out," in which users shared blank black screens in a show of support for Black Lives Matter and peaceful protesting.
In early June, it was reported that Fox News star Sean Hannity had been secretly divorced for over a year . On June 11, his love life was again in the headlines, this time after he was romantically linked to a network colleague , "Fox & Friends" anchor Ainsley Earhardt. Via a spokesperson, Sean declined to comment, saying he won't speak of his private life in public. Ainsley, however, denied dating the "Hannity" host. "Right now I am focused on raising my daughter and I am not dating anyone," she said. "As anyone at Fox News will tell you, Sean is a wonderful person and whomever he chooses to date will be extremely fortunate." However, reports disputed that. "They've been together for two years, their relationship started well after their marriages ended. They are a great couple," a source told Page Six. Another source said, "They are 100% dating." A third source said, "Sean and Ainsley have been together for a while, they are quarantining together in Oyster Bay. They have been seen together many times in the area." Typically reputable People magazine also confirmed the romance.
"Vanderpump Rules" will be short four familiar faces in the future. On June 9, Bravo announced that Stassi Schroeder, Kristen Doute, Max Boyens and Brett Caprioni will not return to the hit reality show . Stassi and Kristen came under fire for past racist acts, which were brought to light by Faith Stowers, who appeared on seasons 4 and 6. Faith, the only Black cast member during her time on the show, accused Stassi and Kristen of calling the cops on her in 2018 for a crime she didn't commit. Racist tweets from Brett and Max resurfaced. Following the firings, many from the Bravo world reacted. Faith said she feels "vindicated." The month wasn't all bad for Stassi though: On June 15, the former reality TV star's rep confirmed that she and fiancé Beau Clark are expecting a baby in January 2021. Bravo also in June parted ways with "Below Deck Mediterranean" star Peter Hunziker after he posted a racist and misogynistic meme on his Instagram Story, and MTV cut ties with "Siesta Key" star Alex Kompothecras after racist social media posts and comments he made came to light.
This month, Jimmy Kimmel issued an apology for using blackface and insensitive racial language in past skits, specifically his imitations of Black stars like NBA player Karl Malone and Oprah Winfrey in the '90s and early aughts when he was starring on "The Man Show." "I have long been reluctant to address this, as I knew doing so would be celebrated as a victory by those who equate apologies with weakness and cheer for leaders who use prejudice to divide us. That delay was a mistake," he said, adding in the lengthy statement that he wanted to apologize to "those who were genuinely hurt or offended by the makeup I wore or the words I spoke." Jimmy said at the time, he "never considered that this might be seen as anything other than an imitation of a fellow human being." The late night host said he's matured since then. "I believe that I have evolved and matured over the last 20-plus years, and I hope that is evident to anyone who watches my show. I know that this will not be the last I hear of this and that it will be used again to try to quiet me. I won't be bullied into silence by those who feign outrage to advance their oppressive and genuinely racist agendas." Late night host Jimmy Fallon and radio host Howard Stern also issued apologies in June after old sketches in which they wore blackface reemerged.
Kelly Clarkson is ending her nearly seven-year marriage to talent manager Brandon Blackstock. On June 4, the singer and talk show host quietly filed divorce paperwork in Los Angeles. Kelly and Brandon share two children, River Rose, 5, and Remington Alexander, 4. Prior to the filing, Kelly had been quarantining with Brandon and their children at their Montana ranch. Kelly wants joint custody of her and Brandon's kids, and she also wants their prenup enforced. Most friends were shocked by the divorce news . "It came out of nowhere," one insider told E! News. "It's all so sad for the kids. They were always such a loving family. It never seemed like they had any issues."
Danny Masterson was charged with forcibly raping three women between 2001 and 2003, the Los Angeles County District Attorney announced on June 17. According to the Los Angeles Times, the former "That '70s Show" actor is accused of raping a 23-year-old woman between January and December 2001. The DA also charged him with raping a 28-year-old woman in April 2003 and a 23-year-old woman between October and December 2003. The alleged crimes occurred in Danny's Hollywood Hills home. An arraignment is scheduled for September. The actor has previously and again denied any wrongdoing. Last August, The Wrap reported that four women filed a civil lawsuit in which they accused the actor of sexual assault and said that he, his religion — the Church of Scientology — and the faith's leader, David Miscavige, harassed them, tried to cover up the alleged assaults, which the women who were also Scientologists had reported to their church, following protocol, and conspired to obstruct justice. Leah Remini, a former Scientologist and now critic of the church, warned on Twitter, "This is just the beginning."
Matt James is breaking the mold and making history. On June 12, ABC announced that Matt, 28, will be the leading man for its next season of "The Bachelor," making him the franchise's first-ever Black male lead. "The Bachelorette" had its only Black lead, Rachel Lindsay, in 2017. Matt, a former college quarterback and teammate of Bachelor Nation star Tyler Cameron's, had previously been cast as a contestant on Clare Crawley's upcoming season of "The Bachelorette" but has since been replaced (Clare's season will tape this summer in a single location in Southern California instead of traveling around the world, Variety reported in June, in order to keep her and the contestants healthy amid the coronavirus pandemic ). The move to cast Matt came following calls and petitions demanding more diversity on the popular ABC show. "We know we have a responsibility to make sure the love stories we're seeing onscreen are representative of the world we live in, and we are proudly in service to our audience," ABC said in statement. "This is just the beginning, and we will continue to take action with regard to diversity issues on this franchise. We feel so privileged to have Matt as our first Black Bachelor and we cannot wait to embark on this journey with him."
Congrats to Heather Locklear! On June 19, multiple media outlets confirmed that the actress recently got engaged to her high school sweetheart, Chris Heisser . The "Melrose Place" star was even photographed sporting a diamond ring while out and about. A friend of the couple's told People magazine they have "been engaged since the end of April, as they were celebrating her year of sobriety." Heather's daughter, Ava Sambora, and ex-husband Richie Sambora fully support the engagement.  "They are really happy together," the friend said. "Her family, her parents, her siblings and her daughter are all supporting her and excited for her."
Dennis Quaid and Laura Savoie eloped at a resort in Santa Barbara, California, on June 2. The couple was able to keep the nuptials quiet for three weeks. "It was beautiful," Dennis told People magazine of the wedding. The actor and his bride, a doctoral student who's 39 years his junior, had initially planned marry in Hawaii, but the coronavirus pandemic forced them to cancel. They exchanged traditional vows and Bulgari rings. "Just looking into her eyes, she was the most stunning bride," he said.
Say goodbye to Lady Antebellum — at least it terms of their name. On June 11, the country music group announced that they were officially changing their name to Lady A to disassociate the band's moniker from racial undertones linked to slavery. The trio — Hillary Scott , Charles Kelley and Dave Haywood — said recent Black Lives Matter demonstrations have revealed "blindspots we didn't even know existed" and that they'd made the decision "after much personal reflection, band discussion, prayer and many honest conversations with some of our closest Black friends and colleagues." The band was initially named after an antebellum-style home in the South. "As musicians, it reminded us of all the music born in the South that influenced us… Southern Rock, Blues, R&B, Gospel and of course Country. But we are regretful and embarrassed to say that we did not take into account the associations that weigh down this word referring to the period of history before The Civil War, which includes slavery," their statement said. "We are deeply sorry for the hurt this has caused and for anyone who has felt unsafe, unseen or unvalued. Causing pain was never our hearts' intention, but it doesn't change the fact that indeed, it did just that. So today, we speak up and make a change."
The Dixie Chicks are no more. On June 25, the trio announced that they had changed their name to The Chicks , explaining on their website, "We want to meet this moment." The trio has already changed their social media handles and website to reflect the new name. The Chicks also amended the cover of their upcoming album, "Gaslighter," to reflect the new name. In addition, the group released a new song on June 25 under the name The Chicks. The song, titled "March March," speaks of peaceful protesting and includes images from recent Black Lives Matter demonstrations.
Surprise! Iggy Azalea is a mom! The rapper revealed on Instagram on June 10 that she has a child. "I have a son," she wrote in a message to fans. "I kept waiting for the right time to say something but if feels like the more time passes the more I realize I'm always going to feel anxious to share news that giant with the world." Iggy didn't share her child's name or mention his father, but she's been linked to rapper Playboi Carti since 2018. Of her son, she added, "I want to keep his life private but wanted to make it clear he is not a secret & I love him beyond words."
