As Gold Hovers Near Record High, Analysts Say "Dream Run" May Continue
As Gold Hovers Near Record High, Analysts Say "Dream Run" May Continue
Jewellers remain optimistic on the demand for gold going ahead, and expect prices to correct with easing of COVID-19-related concerns.
Domestic gold futures registered mild losses on Thursday but still held near the Rs 48,000 per 10 grams mark, a day after the yellow metal registered an all-time high. Gold prices have broken a multitude of records over the past few weeks amid wild swings in the equity markets. Although domestic equity benchmarks Sensex and Nifty have retraced more than one-third of the losses suffered in March, gold continues to quote at unprecedented levels. Typically, gold shares an inverse relationship with shares, and the safe-haven appeal of the precious metal rises with any sign of increased risk in equities. ( Track Gold Rate In India Here )
Gold futures due for an August 5 delivery moved in a narrow range on Thursday, quoting between Rs 47,902 and Rs 48,273 per 10 grams on the Multi Commodity Exchange (MCX) during the session. On Wednesday, the gold futures contract had soared to a record level of Rs 48,982 per 10 grams, before shutting shop at Rs 48,267 per 10 grams for the day.
In the international market, gold prices steadied below the previous day's near eight-year peak as investor appetite for higher-risk assets such as equities improved following encouraging coronavirus vaccine trials, and ahead of US jobs data later in the day. Spot gold was last seen trading little changed at $1,772.33 per ounce.
Analysts say gold prices are likely to appreciate further in the near term.
"Gold has been on a dream run given the risk aversion sentiment prevailing. World ETF (exchange traded fund) holdings have been steadily on the rise and looks like the momentum may continue," said Lakshmi Iyer, chief investment officer (debt) and head products at Kotak Mahindra Asset Management Company.
Sky-high gold prices have kept potential buyers in the country at bay over the past few weeks.
