The public were asked to nominate themselves, a friend, or a family member on Deliveroo’s Instagram, Facebook and Twitter pages by tagging them and highlighting their contribution, to be in with a chance to win.
Last week, Belfast local Martine Robinson was contacted by the food-delivery company, letting her know she’d been selected as one of the 10 gold card winners.
Martine, who provides secretarial services in Occupational Health at a local hospital, had been put forward by her friend Sam on twitter.
The nomination read, “@WeeMartini she works for the NHS and gets 4 buses a day to work .. now that is commitment!! She most definitely deserves one of these Gold Cards”
Martine, 38, who has been working for the NHS for 16 years told Deliveroo that she has seen a huge change in her job since the pandemic hit.
On a day-to-day basis, Martine provides secretarial support, helping to take Covid helpline messages and also helping organise the ambulance staff into post.
When told she had won the prize, Martine said that she was ‘so privileged to have won!’
When asked what she was most looking forward to ordering on Deliveroo, Martine said that she couldn’t wait to treat her twins to a KFC.
Are you a lover of Style, Beauty or Interiors? Maybe you want the latest tips on keeping fit, eating right, organising your home and staying well, not to mention all the latest showbiz goss and the craic around town then follow Belfast Live's brand new lifestyle page Be.
You can find us on Facebook , Twitter and Instagram.
Will Shu, CEO and Co-founder, Deliveroo said: “We want to recognise and celebrate the thousands of key workers across the country who have been doing their bit throughout what has been a remarkably challenging period. The way communities have rallied to support each other is inspiring and these Gold Cards are another small token of our appreciation for the individuals who have gone over and above. From everyone at Deliveroo, thank you.”
Deliveroo has now made over 500,000 free meals available to NHS workers and vulnerable people as part of it’s Support the NHS campaign, which launched in March.
With the support of Deliveroo’s restaurant partners, customer donations and corporate partners, Deliveroo has been delivering meals to hospitals and communities across the country throughout the COVID-19 period. In addition to this, Deliveroo released over 80,000 free £20 vouchers for NHS workers.
