The sharp depreciation in the rupee has given further legs to gold rally in India. Analysts say gold has a lot of steam left despite the recent rally.
New Delhi: The year 2019 and 2020 so far has shown people the importance of having gold in an investment portfolio. A trade war between the US and China, geopolitical tensions and lowering of interest rate by central banks globally led to 20% rally in the yellow metal in 2019. This year so far gold has rallied 22% amid the uncertainty caused by Covid outbreak as people are staying away from riskier assets and flocked to the yellow metal, which is traditionally considered as a safe haven asset.
Gold prices have jumped 42% in the past one year. The last one year has drastically changed the long term returns of gold. One year ago, 5-year annualised return from gold was 4% and 7-year return was merely 1.5%. But now after the recent rally, gold's 5-year return stands at nearly 12% and 7-year returns at 7.8%, according to a report in the ET Wealth.
With this sharp turnaround in gold and the fall in equities, the yellow metal has comfortably beaten equities both in the short and long terms. However, very few have benefited from the gold rally. Many investors had given up on gold after the yellow metal generated muted return in the past decade to 2019. Worth mentioning here is that gold crossed its 2012 high after seven years in 2019. Those who missed the bus are now contemplating to make fresh entry into the asset class while those who had invested in the yellow metal long ago are now wondering if they should hold or buy more or sell the asset.
Will the gold rally continue?
It is relatively certain that the rally in gold is going to continue for some more time as the present economic situation favours the yellow metal. The uncertainty caused by the outbreak of Covid is unlikely to go away soon and low interest rates are likely to stay till we witness a recovery in global growth. Both these things bode well for gold.
Analysts say gold particularly does well during periods of negative “real” interest rates. That is when inflation rate is higher than the prevailing interest rate in the economy. Central banks across the globe are continuing to infuse more money into their economies to avert recession. Due to this interest rates are heading lower and currencies are getting devalued. This situation makes case for investment in gold. “It is at times like these that gold reclaims its role as a store of wealth, which will keep pace with inflation to preserve the purchasing power of capital,” ICICI Securities mentioned in a note.
In India, gold prices are influenced by global spot rate of the metal, rupee-dollar exchange rate plus customs duty. The sharp depreciation in the rupee has given further legs to the gold rally in India. With the government borrowing heavily to fund its stimulus package, India’s credit profile has deteriorated further. This will contribute to rupee depreciation in the coming years, which in turn will support domestic gold prices, ET Wealth mentioned in a report. To sum up safe-haven appeal of gold will not go away soon as economic activity is not likely to revert to normal anytime soon. Analysts say gold has a lot of steam left despite the 22% rally in this year so far.
“With heightened uncertainty and growing expectations of a global recession, unprecedented levels of stimulus from central banks and historically low interest rates, we believe that gold will touch higher levels,” ET Wealth quoted Saida Litosh, Manager, Precious Metals, Refinitiv, as saying. Refinitiv is a financial markets intelligence provider. “Investors seem to be buying gold to protect their portfolios (as insurance) from a further deterioration of the economic environment,” said Unmesh Kulkarni, MD of global private banking advisory Julius Baer India.
Despite the strong outlook for gold, Investment advisors say one should not go overboard with gold investments. It’s time to exercise caution and not chase the prices, the publication quoted Kulkarni as saying. Experts say investment in gold should be done from portfolio diversification point of view and not to maximise investment returns. Most experts suggest gold should be a permanent part of your investment portfolio but you should not have more than 10-15% exposure to it. However, as a tactical strategy, one can add up to 20% gold to his/her portfolio.
If you believe that you are underinvested in gold then only you should add more gold to your portfolio at this stage, say analysts. “Discipline in sticking to strategic asset allocation should be maintained since it would incorporate long-term investment goals and needs. Accordingly, gold would deserve some allocation in the portfolio, with tactical changes to be done on a periodic basis,” Rajesh Cheruvu, CIO, Validus Wealth told ET Wealth.
Worth mentioning here is that volatility in gold has accelerated recently. Between January and June 2019, annualised daily volatility in gold prices was 13.5%. This has doubled to 27% this year. So one needs to be cautious while making fresh investment at this stage.
