China Precious Metals Mining Markets, 2019-2023 - ResearchAndMarkets.com
DUBLIN--( BUSINESS WIRE )--The "Precious Metals Mining in China to 2023" report has been added to ResearchAndMarkets.com's offering.
"Precious Metals Mining in China to 2023" comprehensively covers China's reserves of gold and silver, historic and forecast trends in China's precious metals production and the key active, exploration and development mines and projects. The report also analyses factors affecting the country's demand for gold and silver, profiles the major precious metals producers and details the country's regulatory regime.
In 2018, China produced 14.1Moz of gold and 123.5Moz of silver. Gold production remained close to 2012 levels, owing to the sluggish demand from domestic end-use sectors. However, the country's silver production increased by 2.1%, owing to the strong performance of base metals in that year. The majority of precious metals originates from the province of Shandong, Henan, Tibet, Zhejiang, and Hubei.
Chinese silver mine production is projected to grow at a CAGR of 2.9% over the forecast period (2019-2023), with this growth supported by several upcoming projects. However, gold production is expected to drop to 13.6Moz.
In China, the State Council holds supreme power and administration rights. It manages China's internal politics, diplomacy, national defense, finance, economy, culture, and education.
The report contains an overview of China's gold and silver mining industries together with the key factors affecting the industry and demand for the commodities. It provides information about reserves, historic and forecast production of each metal, the competitive landscape and list of top active, exploration and development projects.
Gain an understanding of China's gold and silver mining industries, their reserves; historic and forecast production; demand drivers; active, exploration and development mines and projects; the competitive landscape and the country's mining fiscal regime
