Indigenous leaders have appealed to the Brazilian Supreme Court to order the Federal Government to protect isolated tribes by barring outsiders from reservation lands and expelling illegal poachers, loggers and miners.
Indigenous umbrella organisation APIB said 405 Indigenous people had died of COVID-9 by June 27, and 9,983 were infected, among 112 different tribes.
"The Indigenous health service is good for us, they help us, so we came to ask for help, to see if we are well," said a Yanomami elder though an interpreter at a testing station.
More than 60,000 people have died in Brazil due to COVID-19, with at least 1.4 million cases confirmed.
With trillions predicted to be lost in the tourism sector there could be more planes stored in the American desert.
Global tourism revenues are expected to fall by up to $3.3 trillion due to COVID-19 restrictions, with the United States standing to lose the most, according to a UN study.
The 'COVID-19 and Tourism' report released by The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) is based on three scenarios for the industry  — they relate to lockdown measures lasting either 4, 8 or 12 months.
In those scenarios, revenues would fall $US1.17 trillion, $US2.22 trillion and $US3.3 trillion respectively, or between 1.5 to 4.2 per cent of the world's gross domestic product (GDP).
Tourism revenue falls could be between 1.5 to 4.2 percent of the world's gross domestic product, according to the report.
The report did not say which scenario was most likely, although an UNCTAD official said the middle scenario "could be a realistic one".
"International tourism has been almost totally suspended, and domestic tourism curtailed by lockdown conditions imposed in many countries," the report said.
"Although some destinations have started slowly to open up, many are afraid of international travel or cannot afford it due to the economic crisis."
The United States incurs the highest losses in all three scenarios, with a $187 billion drop in the one lasting just four months, followed by China with $105 billion.
Thailand and France also stand to lose approximately $47 billion each.
Small island states such as Jamaica stand to suffer big losses in proportion to their economies, facing an 11 per cent fall in GDP.
The US loss in the "pessimistic" scenario is $538 billion, or three per cent of GDP.
The UNCTAD report covers 65 individual countries and regions.
A groom has died and more than 100 guests tested positive for coronavirus after a wedding turned into a super-spreader event in India's eastern state of Bihar, local media reported.
The man, said to be a software engineer working near the capital New Delhi, reportedly had symptoms of the virus before the wedding ceremony on June 15 and he died in the days after the wedding.
His funeral was also believed to be a source for the outbreak.
Authorities were unable to confirm if he had the virus as the man was cremated before any tests could be carried out.
The bride has tested negative for coronavirus.
According to local media reports, about 400 guests attended the wedding and 200 were at the funeral.
"So far 111 people who either attended the wedding or the funeral have tested positive," said Raj Kishor Chaudhary, chief medical officer in Patna.
The Indian Government, which is gradually lifting its strict lockdown, only permits 50 guests at weddings and 20 at a funeral.
India currently has 585,481 cases of coronavirus and 17,400 dead.
The mayor of a Colombian town has been praised after he turned his own son, nephew and a close friend in to the police for breaking a curfew imposed to curb the spread of coronavirus.
"My family are the first who have to respect the rules," said Carlos Higgins Villanueva, mayor of the hard-hit town of Juan de Acosta.
There have been more than 95,000 confirmed cases of the virus in Colombia and more than 3,300 people have died.
Atlantico, the northern state home to Juan de Acosta, has the second-highest number of infections.
Mayor Higgins posted pictures of himself and the men to the police station, where he asked officers "to deal with the rule-breakers as they see fit".
The three had been caught on video celebrating Father's Day.
The party they attended was not only held during the hours of a strict curfew but there was also alcohol on sale, in contravention of a temporary state-wide ban imposed for that weekend.
Mayor Higgins wrote on Twitter: "My relatives are the first who have to respect these measures. I will not allow them to put the lives of our villagers at risk just because they wanted to have some drinks."
People outside the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg protest against coronavirus vaccine trials in Africa.
Anti-vaccine protesters have taken to the streets of Johannesburg to voice their concern over Africa's first human trials for a potential coronavirus vaccine.
Last week, the University of the Witwatersrand in partnership with Oxford University rolled out South Africa's first clinical trial, which will consist of 2,000 volunteers.
The involvement of South Africa in vaccine trials is intended to ensure the continent will have access to an affordable vaccine and not be left at the back of the queue.
However, around 50 people held protests in Johannesburg, saying they did not want Africans to be used as human guinea pigs.
"I'm not happy at all! I mean this feels like the 1980s all over again when the AIDS pandemic just broke out in South Africa," said 29-year-old graphic designer Tebogo Legoale.
Some of the placards carried by demonstrators read: "We are not guinea pigs."
South Africa has the highest rate of infections on the continent, with confirmed cases at over 150,000 and more than 2,600 deaths.
Northern Ireland's first minister Arlene Foster has called on her deputy to apologise for undermining coronavirus restrictions at the funeral of a member of her Sinn Fein party and ex-Irish Republican Army (IRA) prisoner which attracted large crowds.
The Northern Ireland Government, led by Sinn Fein and its rival Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), allowed up to 30 people at funerals from Monday, including some friends but only when no household or family members of the deceased were there.
Deputy First Minister Michelle O'Neill of Sinn Fein, party president Mary Lou McDonald, former party leader Gerry Adams, and the party's deputy in the Irish republic Pearse Doherty, were all at Tuesday's funeral in Belfast for Bobby Storey.
Images from the funeral show Storey's relatives present and large numbers of mourners on streets nearby.
"It is quite intolerable now that people think that there are some people to whom the law doesn't apply and that indeed there are some politicians who are saying: 'Do as I say but not as I do'," First Minister Arlene Foster told BBC Radio Ulster.
A Malian soldier stands near an isolation tent for patients with the coronavirus in Timbuktu.
There are no commercial flights to Timbuktu, whose remote location in the Sahara Desert has long made the town's name synonymous with the ends of the Earth.
But health officials say the global pandemic has managed to reach there all the same.
Already there are more than 500 cases including at least 9 deaths, making it Mali's largest outbreak outside the capital of Bamako.
In Timbuktu there are more than 500 recorded cases including at least nine deaths, making it Mali's largest outbreak outside the capital.
At the local hospital, a cluster of tents set up outside now houses 32 COVID-19 patients. There isn't a single ventilator available. Temperatures regularly soar above 45 degrees, adding to the patients' misery as they battle fever.
"I've been on the brink of death because there were times I was gasping for air like a fish that's just been taken out of the river," said Harandane Toure, a teacher in his 50s who can't pinpoint where exactly he might have contracted the virus.
COVID-19 first arrived in Mali in March, when two cases emerged — one in Bamako and the other in Kayes, a city with strong ties to the Malian diaspora in Europe.
By April, the virus made its way 1,000km from the capital to Timbuktu, a more than 24-hour journey by road. There are just a few buses a week from the capital, though cars used as public transport also make the trip.
Wigan faces bankruptcy just a month after being taken over by a Hong Kong-based consortium.
Wigan, the 2013 FA Cup winners now in the English second division, have entered bankruptcy protection due to the financial impact of the coronavirus pandemic, and only a month after being taken over by a Hong Kong-based consortium.
The northern English club is currently 14th in the League Championship with six games remaining of the season.
"Our immediate objectives are to ensure the club completes all its fixtures this season and to urgently find interested parties to save Wigan Athletic FC and the jobs of the people who work for the club," Begbies Traynor, the business recovery company, said in a statement.
"Obviously the suspension of the season due to COVID-19 has had a significant impact on the recent fortunes of the club.
The club was relegated from the Premier League in 2013 — the same year they shocked Manchester City in the FA Cup final.
Wigan dropped down into third-tier League One in 2015 but made an immediate return to the Championship.
The club reported losses of 9.2 million pounds ($A16.5 million) last year.
The English Football League (EFL) has confirmed that Wigan would be docked 12 points, the standard penalty for a club entering administration.
What you need to know about coronavirus:
