The Motley Fool Canada » Investing » COVID-19 Investing: 2 Red-Hot Gold Stocks to Own
Ambrose O'Callaghan | May 21, 2020 | More on: AUY YRI
Before the New Year, I’d discussed why gold was my favoured bet over Bitcoin for 2020. At the time, there were several positive trends for the yellow metal. However, no one could have predicted the impact a global pandemic could have on precious metals this year. The spot price of gold per ounce managed to surge to a seven-year high in 2020. Gold stocks have predictably performed well. The scary thing is the gold price rally may just be getting started.
The spot price of gold gained momentum in 2019, but many gold miners failed to follow suit. Investors have continued to be skeptical when it comes to the yellow metal. This should come as no surprise considering its volatility since coming out of the 2007-2008 financial crisis.
In February, I’d recommended gold stocks, as COVID-19 fears pushed the spot price of gold even higher. Countries in Europe and North America are pursuing a gradual re-opening, but the economic consequences of the lockdown are just beginning to rear their head. Markets have bounced back, but there is still unease due to this historic crisis. Gold stocks still offer investors the chance to hedge against more volatility in 2020 and beyond.
There are several ways for investors to obtain exposure to gold. Today, I want to look at two gold miners that have erupted over the past few months.
Yamana Gold (TSX:YRI) (NYSE:AUY) is a top Toronto-based gold producer. The company had disappointed in recent years, but it has gathered significant momentum this spring. Shares of Yamana have soared 184% year over year as of close on May 20. The stock is up 49% in 2020 so far.
The company released its first-quarter 2020 results on April 30. Adjusted net earnings climbed to $47.2 million, or $0.05 per share, compared to $24.0 million, or $0.03 per share, in the prior year. Gold equivalent ounce production rose to 221,746, which was in line with expectations. Moreover, Yamana increased its quarterly dividend payout by 25% to $0.0125 per share. This represents a modest 1.1% yield.
Yamana boasts a fantastic balance sheet. Better yet, the stock still possesses a favourable price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio of 19 and a price-to-book (P/B) value of 1.2.
Barrick Gold is the second-largest gold producer in the world. Its shares have climbed 131% year over year as of close on May 20. The gold stock has increased 57% in 2020 so far.
In the first quarter of 2020, Barrick Gold reported adjusted net earnings of $285 million compared to $184 million in Q1 2019. Free cash flow surged to $438 million over $146 million and net cash provided by operating activities increased to $889 million. Gold production and costs were in line with Barrick’s full-year guidance.
Barrick last paid out a quarterly dividend of $0.07 per share, representing a 1% yield. Shares last had a P/E ratio of 11 and a P/B value of 2.2. Barrick also possesses an excellent balance sheet and attractive value in this space as we look ahead to the summer.
Speaking of hot stocks in the spring...
Renowned Canadian investor Iain Butler just named 10 stocks for Canadians to buy TODAY. So if you’re tired of reading about other people getting rich in the stock market, this might be a good day for you.
Because Motley Fool Canada is offering a full 65% off the list price of their top stock-picking service, plus a complete membership fee back guarantee on what you pay for the service. Simply click here to discover how you can take advantage of this.
Fool contributor Ambrose O'Callaghan has no position in any of the stocks mentioned.
Two New Stock Picks Every Month!
Not to alarm you, but you’re about to miss an important event.
Iain Butler and the Stock Advisor Canada team only publish their new “buy alerts” twice a month, and only to an exclusively small group.
This is your chance to get in early on what could prove to be very special investment advice.
Enter your email address below to get started now, and join the other thousands of Canadians who have already signed up for their chance to get the market-beating advice from Stock Advisor Canada.
I consent to receiving information from The Motley Fool via email, direct mail, and occasional special offer phone calls. I understand I can unsubscribe from these updates at any time. Please read the Privacy Statement and Terms of Service for more information.
