Nelson father of three Jake Jones died on June 16, after the car he was a passenger in crashed on the way to Greymouth.
Thirty-year-old Jacob Gibbons (who went by Jake Jones) of Nelson, died on the evening of June 16 when the car he was travelling in crashed near Greymouth.
Jones was a passenger in the car, and was killed when the vehicle went down a bank off Seven Mile Rd and ended up on its roof.
The two other occupants survived, and police are still investigating the circumstances of the crash.
Family and friends gathered in Nelson for the funeral, which was held at the Riwaka Rugby Clubrooms in Motueka on Thursday.
Jake's sister Gina Jones Walsh​ said the large number of people who had come to her brother's funeral was a testament to the many lives he had been a part of.
"The love and support that’s come from everybody has been unbelievable, it shows his character and how many people he’s touched over the years – from early childhood, right through to people who he met probably a couple of days before he passed away."
Jones's funeral was held in Motueka on Thursday.
Jones Walsh said the father of three was the kind of man who loved people and would "do anything" for his friends and family.
"Those were the biggest things to him, and his children were his life."
Originally from Motueka, Jake had spent much of his adult years living back and forth between Nelson and Christchurch.
Jones Walsh said for much of that time he had worked on fishing boats, but with the long trips away from family he had got a job on land to be closer to them.
"That’s what he really loved to do, but with a young family it was a bit hard to be out at sea."
Jones Walsh said after losing his Hirepool job during lockdown, Jake had got a call to get back on the fishing boats at the end of May – which led him over to the West Coast at the time of the crash.
She said Jake had spent much of the past month with her in Christchurch, while she had been staying there for the birth of her first child – who was born prematurely.
Jones family and friends said he was the kind of man who would give the shirt off his back to those he cared about.
"I didn't ask him to come, but he knew I needed him to be there.
"He liked to look after people, to make sure they were OK. He was always asking if I wanted a ride to the hospital and back, if there’s anything he could do."
She also described her brother as a quick-witted and charming bloke who could talk his way into – and out of – anything.
"He’s the person you expect to find sitting on the couch when you walk in the door.
Jake Jones' order of service. Jake died in a motor vehicle accident on the West Coast on June 16.
Childhood friend Alec Young said Jake loved going on spur-of-the-moment trips and adventures, and was always there for his friends.
"He was always on the go, he couldn't sit down for long. He’d just jump in the car and go with you, he was up for a good time no matter what it was."
"He lived life like a rich man, but he wasn’t a rich man – he gave everything away. He’d give you his whole paycheck if he thought it would help you out."
Walsh said it still hadn't quite sunk in that her brother was gone.
"He was very much loved by his family and friends, we’re all very proud of who he was.
