The gold futures contract lost 0.25% on Thursday, as it retraced some of the recent advance.
The gold futures contract lost 0.25% on Thursday, as it retraced some of the recent advance. The market got very close to $1,800 mark on Wednesday but then it has reversed lower. The recent economic data releases didn’t bring any new surprises for the financial markets. However, gold broke above its local highs, as we can see on the daily chart:
Gold is unchanged this morning, as it is continues to fluctuate along Wednesday’s and yesterday’s closing prices. What about the other precious metals? Silver gained 1.27% on Thursday and today it is 0.3% higher. Platinum lost 0.24% and today it is trading 0.3% lower. Palladium lost 2.30% yesterday and today it is up 0.8%. So precious metals extend their short-term consolidation today.
Financial markets are waiting for today’s U.S. economic data releases. We will get the Personal Spending / Personal Income numbers along with Core PCE Price Index at 8:30:0 a.m. Then the Revised UoM Consumer Sentiment number will be released at 10:00 a.m.
Below you will find our Gold, Silver, and Mining Stocks economic news schedule for today:
10:00 a.m. U.S. – Revised UoM Consumer Sentiment, Revised UoM Inflation Expectations
Thank you for reading today’s free analysis. We hope you enjoyed it. If so, we would like to invite you to sign up for our free gold newsletter. Once you sign up, you’ll also get 7-day no-obligation trial of all our premium gold services, including our Gold & Silver Trading Alerts. Sign up today!
For a look at all of today’s economic events, check out our economic calendar .
All essays, research and information found above represent analyses and opinions of Paul Rejczak and Sunshine Profits’ associates only. As such, it may prove wrong and be a subject to change without notice. Opinions and analyses were based on data available to authors of respective essays at the time of writing. Although the information provided above is based on careful research and sources that are believed to be accurate, Paul Rejczak and his associates do not guarantee the accuracy or thoroughness of the data or information reported. The opinions published above are neither an offer nor a recommendation to purchase or sell any securities. Mr. Rejczak is not a Registered Securities Advisor. By reading Paul Rejczak’s reports you fully agree that he will not be held responsible or liable for any decisions you make regarding any information provided in these reports. Investing, trading and speculation in any financial markets may involve high risk of loss. Paul Rejczak, Sunshine Profits’ employees and affiliates as well as members of their families may have a short or long position in any securities, including those mentioned in any of the reports or essays, and may make additional purchases and/or sales of those securities without notice.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
