“The question is — and this is part of the reason why I expect this particular gold market to probably be a long-lasting bull market — what we don’t know, and I don’t think anyone knows this, is what’s the end game? What’s the exit?” said Coffin, who was speaking at the online Metals Investor Forum.
“(Powell) basically just said, ‘Look, it’s just not my problem right now — I don’t care what the exit is, I’m worried about keeping things from falling apart,” he continued.
“That’s alarming at one level, but it’s music to my ears as a gold investor because that tells me that this uncertainty and this desire to have non-financial-system assets is probably going to go on for awhile.”
Coffin noted that while gold did see a steep price drop in mid-March, a turnaround began after the first large monetary and fiscal packages were rolled out.
“It’s actually much like the great financial crisis — the move in gold that ultimately went for three or four years really started when they unrolled (the Troubled Asset Relief Program) in 2009 … I think we’re seeing a similar pattern here. I’ve got no reason to expect it’s going to be any different,” he commented.
Although gold is reaping the benefits of the current economic situation, not all gold stocks are enjoying the same gains. Coffin reminded listeners that gold stocks tend to move in a specific order.
“So far it’s largely been companies that are … farther up the food chain than the juniors — in other words, development-level companies, ones that have feasibility studies , ones that are literally on the road to production, construction,” he explained. “The other group that seems to be getting a lot of benefits so far is higher-grade stories.”
Coffin mentioned that some optionality plays — companies with large, low-grade deposits that have potential but are uneconomic at current prices — are also beginning to move. Select juniors are going up as well, but usually it takes time for money to filter down to these smaller companies.
Part of the reason gold stocks are gaining momentum right now is that generalist investors — those who aren’t normally interested in gold — are coming into the market.
