Domestic markets are moving higher but analysts are still cautious of this move with some saying a correction is imminent given the disconnect between the market and ground reality. Jimeet Modi, CEO, Samco Securities told investors to be cautious, conserve cash and wait on the sidelines. Amid this level of uncertainty, here are 15 stocks that can offer solid returns over the next 3-4 weeks.
Bata | BUY | Target Price: Rs 1,410
For the last 49 trading sessions, this counter appears to be moving in a well defined ascending channel with multiple touchpoints. As this counter is trading close to the demand line of the said channel, a bounce can be expected from current levels. As risk-reward ratios from current levels appear to be favourable, positional traders should buy into this counter with a stop below Rs 1,310 on a closing basis and look for a target of Rs 1,410, the analyst said.[Analyst: Mazhar Mohammad, Chief Strategist – Technical Research & Trading Advisory, Chartviewindia.in]
Ramco Cements | BUY | Target Price: Rs 695
This counter appears to be consolidating in a zone of Rs 648-595 levels and a strong comeback in last two trading sessions from the lower end of the said consolidation range is hinting that it can be on the verge of a breakout. Considering the current volatility in the markets, positional traders are advised to adopt a two-pronged strategy of buying now and on declines between Rs 610-602 levels, the analyst said. On a sustainable breakout above Rs 650 levels, a target of Rs 695 can be expected. Stop suggested for the trade is a close below Rs 600 levels.[Analyst: Mazhar Mohammad, Chief Strategist – Technical Research & Trading Advisory, Chartviewindia.in]
Tata Power | BUY | Target Price: Rs 55
This counter appears to have registered a fresh breakout on lower time frame charts after consolidating in a narrow range for the last five trading sessions. Hence, sustaining above Rs 43, this counter can be expected to head higher towards its next logical target of Rs 55. Hence, positional traders should buy into this counter and look for a target of Rs 55 with a stop below 43 on a closing basis, the analyst said.[Analyst: Mazhar Mohammad, Chief Strategist – Technical Research & Trading Advisory, Chartviewindia.in]
BEL | BUY | Target Price: Rs 95
On daily and weekly charts, the stock has formed higher high and higher low series pattern that clearly suggests the stock is in a strong uptrend. On weekly charts, the stock managed to close above Rs 85 with strong bullish continuation candle which is broadly positive. In addition, the strong price volume breakout kind of pattern clearly indicates uptrend likely to continue in the near term, the analyst said. For the breakout, Rs 81 should act as a trend decider level. If the stock manages to trade above the same then we can expect continuation uptrend rally up to Rs 95. Stop-loss suggested for the counter is Rs 81.[Analyst: Shrikant Chouhan, Executive Vice President, Equity Technical Research at Kotak Securities]
To invest Rs 1 lakh in the current market, Umesh Mehta, Head of Research at Samco Securities, suggests putting in Rs 60,000 in equities, and Rs 20,000 each in fixed income and gold.
Hemang Jani, Head Equity Strategist, Broking & Distribution, MOFSL, said investors should hold 5 per cent in cash for future uncertainties. His asset mix: 60 per cent in equities, 20 per cent in fixed income and 15 per cent in gold.
The price of the yellow metal has jumped nearly 37 per cent in last one year, while the BSE Sensex is down 12 per cent for the same period. There are hopes that the trend will remain positive for gold.
Analysts say geopolitical tensions and weak forecasts for the global economy will keep gold prices on an uptrend.
G Chokkalingam, Founder, Equinomics Research, said an investor with average risk profile can put at least 50 per cent (around 70 per cent for highly conservative investors) in fixed income after the 35 per cent rally in stocks from their March lows. The remaining amount can be put in gold and equities.
He said if domestic equities fall more than 10 per cent from current level, then investors can start increasing equity allocation gradually.
Siddharth Sedani, VP, Equity Advisory at Anand Rathi Shares and Stock Brokers, advised investors to put in 50 per cent in equities in a staggered manner.
“The market will remain uncertain till the time a cure for the pandemic is found. We believe the current reasonable valuations could be used as an opportunity to top up existing investments,” he said, adding that consumption, chemicals, IT and pharma stocks may lead the next rally when the economy starts reviving.
