The first is fear of a global financial crisis. Six out of 1o of those who responded to the survey said that was a key reason for centrals wanting to hold gold.
The 2007-2009 crisis left many financial assets such as some fixed income securities near worthless, and has rightly left central bankers cautious over what national assets they hold.
The current government efforts to contain the spread of Covid-19 ha shut down entire economies preventing companies from making money and leaving many people without work. That malaise could easily end in a financial crisis if the economy doesn’t get going again quickly.
Jointly topping the list of reasons for adding gold to a country’s national reserves is the “ongoing low to negative yields in advanced economy debt,” the report states. Negative interest rates mean that investors get back less money than the price they pay for the security.
Six out of 10 respondents said that was a key reason for the central banks to add gold.
Central banks tend to buy gold when they see the opportunity to obtain the metal at a good price. In practice that means they’ll likely choose to purchase bullion on price dips. That should mean that the market will not see huge falls or plunges over the long term. Or put another way, if you are investing in gold, such as the emtal held in the SPDR Gold Shares (GLD) exchange-traded fund, then the trend should be in your favor.
Simon Constable | Author | Broadcaster | Journalist | Commentator | Speaker. Author of The Wall Street Journal's 'In Translation' column. Fellow at the Johns Hopkins
Simon Constable | Author | Broadcaster | Journalist | Commentator | Speaker. Author of The Wall Street Journal's 'In Translation' column. Fellow at the Johns Hopkins Institute for Applied Economics, Global Health and the Study of Business Enterprise. Former staffer for General Motors Treasurer's Office. MBA from Darden Graduate School of Business at The University of Virginia. MA New York University. MA (Hons) University of St. Andrews, Scotland. Co-author of the award-winning book The WSJ Guide to the 50 Economic Indicators that Really Matter. Have written for Middle East Eye, TheStreet.com, The South China Morning Post, Barron's, Dow Jones Newswires, MarketWatch.
