The recent FTSE 100 crash and subsequent rally highlight how volatile the stock market can be. As such, many investors may feel that gold and buy-to-let properties offer greater stability, as well as long-term growth potential .
However, the low valuations currently on offer across the FTSE 100 suggest it can deliver strong returns in the long run. As such, it could be a better means of making a million over the coming years than buying gold or buy-to-let properties.
The FTSE 100’s near-term performance could continue to be highly volatile. There’s still a lack of clarity about how the coronavirus pandemic will progress. For example, there could be a second wave later in the year, or there may be challenges in finding a suitable treatment for it.
As such, company earnings and investor sentiment may change rapidly in a short space of time. This could lead to sudden falls in the index’s price level.
However, over the long run, the FTSE 100’s return potential continues to be relatively attractive. Since its inception in 1984, the index has recorded a total annualised return in excess of 8%. Therefore, investors who are able to adopt a long-term timeframe can generate strong returns through buying a diverse range of large-cap shares.
The future prospects of the FTSE 100 could be even more attractive than they’ve been in the past. Many of its incumbents trade on valuations significantly below their long-term averages. This could suggest they offer wide margins of safety that allow investors to generate impressive capital returns as the economy gradually recovers.
By contrast, valuations for buy-to-let investors may prove to be highly unattractive. The average house price versus average income has been at record levels over recent years. This suggests house prices are largely unaffordable – especially without government policies such as Help to Buy that are unlikely to last in perpetuity.
Likewise, the gold price is close to an all-time high at present. It could move even higher in the short run should investor sentiment towards riskier assets remain weak. But, over the long term, there may be less scope to generate high capital returns from gold than from undervalued FTSE 100 shares.
Investors who’ve a long-term time horizon can generate a seven-figure portfolio through investing regularly in FTSE 100 shares. For example, assuming an 8% annual total return on a monthly investment of £500, your portfolio could be valued at £1m after 35 years.
Certainly, not every investor has that amount of money to invest east month. They may also not have a 35-year time horizon. But the example serves to show that the FTSE 100 can produce a surprisingly large nest egg over the long run. Especially while it offers attractive valuations following its recent market crash.
Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all fired up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the pandemic!).
But its capital-light, highly scalable business model has previously helped it deliver consistently high sales, astounding near-70% margins, and rising shareholder returns … in fact, in 2019 it returned a whopping £150m+ to shareholders in dividends and buybacks!
While COVID-19 may have thrown the company a curveball, management have acted swiftly to ensure this business is as well placed as it can be to ride out the current period of uncertainty… in fact, our analyst believes it should come roaring back to life, just as soon as normal economic activity resumes.
That’s why we think now could be the perfect time for you to start building your own stake in this exceptional business – especially given the shares look to be trading on a fairly undemanding valuation for the year to March 2021.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Growth Share… free of charge!
Peter Stephens has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
