The FTSE 100’s market crash of 2020 could lead some investors to refocus their capital on assets such as gold and Bitcoin, rather than stocks. After all, gold and Bitcoin have outperformed the FTSE 100 over recent months, and could continue this trend in the short run.
However, the long-term track record of the FTSE 100 shows that it has always fully recovered from its downturns. As such, buying high-quality stocks while they are priced at low levels today could be a sound strategy.
With that in mind, here are two FTSE 100 shares that could be worth buying today. They could boost your retirement prospects.
Housebuilder Taylor Wimpey’s (LSE: TW) recent trading update highlighted its financial strength during a challenging period for the wider industry. It has a cash position of around £836m, which suggests that it is in a strong position to overcome what could be an extended period of lower sales.
Demand for new homes may continue to be low over the coming months. With a challenging economic outlook, many prospective house purchasers may decide to postpone their decisions until there is greater clarity surrounding their employment situation. Therefore, even if construction restarts on Taylor Wimpey’s sites, demand for its homes could be weak for a while.
However, over the long run the FTSE 100 company may enjoy stronger operating conditions. The UK’s lack of housing supply, low interest rates and government schemes could sustain rising volumes of new homes in the coming years. As such, with Taylor Wimpey’s share price now trading 23% down on its level of the start of 2020, it could offer good value for money for long-term investors.
Another FTSE 100 share that could be worth buying today for the long run is GSK (LSE: GSK) . Its recent update highlighted that assessing the financial impact of coronavirus in the current year is likely to be challenging. However, the company maintained its previous guidance after a strong first quarter that included an impressive growth rate across its portfolio.
GSK is set to experience a significant amount of change over the coming years. Its plans to divest consumer healthcare interests and shift its focus towards being a pharmaceutical business have continued. Yes, this process may cause some uncertainty in the short run. But it could lead to more focused operations that enable the separate entities to become more efficient.
With GSK recently confirming its quarterly dividend, it has a yield of around 4.7%. This suggests that it offers good value for money relative to many of its FTSE 100 index peers. It may also become more popular among income-seeking investors at a time when many large-cap shares are cutting their dividends. This could lead to strong total returns from the stock, which could boost your retirement prospects.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Peter Stephens owns shares of GlaxoSmithKline and Taylor Wimpey. The Motley Fool UK owns shares of and has recommended GlaxoSmithKline. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
