Big numbers are arriving for unemployment. And GDP is well down. Indeed, we face possibly the worst general economic recession in a generation – perhaps in generations. We may not be out of the woods yet when it comes to crashing FTSE 100 shares.
Meanwhile, the prices of Bitcoin and gold have been trending up since mid-March along with the rally we’ve seen in the general stock market. So, should I invest in Bitcoin, gold, or shares today?
For me, the answer to that question is the same every time. It’s shares all the way, and for some very good reasons. But before I consider them, let’s look at why gold and Bitcoin are so unappealing.
The argument against investing in Bitcoin and instruments that track the price of gold is a simple one – both gold and Bitcoin lack any reliable fundamentals that may drive their prices higher. Of course, both do move higher, and they can crash back down again as well. But the main impetus behind movements in their prices is speculation.
Shares, on the other hand, are backed by businesses. But we must be careful when investing in shares. And, happily, by the time companies have grown large enough to enter the FTSE 100 index, they’re usually quite stable. Indeed, many have financial strength with support from cash-producing businesses. Often, earnings are robust and there’s a strong tradition of paying shareholder dividends among constituents of London’s lead index.
However, even the FTSE 100 can be a volatile hunting ground. Whatever their size, not all businesses are equal. And I’d firstly divide them is into two piles. The first would contain defensive businesses with cash-generating operations that remain little affected by the ups and downs of the wider economy.
We can find many defensive companies in sectors such as pharmaceuticals, energy suppliers, utilities, fast-moving consumer goods and others. I’m thinking of names such as GlaxoSmithKline, National Grid, Severn Trent, British American Tobacco, Diageo, and Unilever.
My second pile would contain stocks with cyclical underlying businesses. Earnings in those beasts will be sensitive to the ups and downs of the wider economy. We can find them in sectors such as banking, resources, retail, travel and leisure. I’m thinking of names such as BHP, HSBC, Lloyds Banking, Burberry, and Whitbread. We’ve seen recently what can happen to those type of stocks in a general economic downturn.
And I’d also separate the FTSE 100 into two more piles of faster-growing businesses and fading business. Generally, the faster-growing companies can be found nearer the bottom of the index where market capitalisations are smaller. But they have room to grow!
However, there are decent opportunities in all the categories I’ve identified in the FTSE 100. And I’d deal with the current market volatility by investing regularly rather than all in one go. With a long investing time horizon in mind , I reckon FTSE 100 shares can help me compound my way to early retirement.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Kevin Godbold has no position in any share mentioned. The Motley Fool UK owns shares of and has recommended GlaxoSmithKline and Unilever. The Motley Fool UK has recommended Burberry, Diageo, HSBC Holdings, and Lloyds Banking Group. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
