The FTSE 100 may have fallen by around 15% since the start of the year, but the price of gold has surged to its highest level in over seven years. Investors are increasingly flocking to less risky assets, and gold’s track record as a store of wealth means that it could move higher in the short run.
However, in the long run the FTSE 100 could deliver impressive returns. It now appears to offer a wide margin of safety, while it has a solid track record of recovery. Therefore, investors who are looking to build a seven-figure portfolio in the long run may be better off buying undervalued FTSE 100 shares today rather than holding expensive gold.
Gold has become increasingly popular in recent weeks due to its defensive characteristics. It has been viewed as a store of wealth for many years, and its price has therefore often risen during periods of economic uncertainty.
With the ultimate impact of the spread of the coronavirus on the world economy’s growth rate still a ‘known unknown’, it would be unsurprising for investor sentiment to further weaken in the short run. Investors may, therefore, seek to reduce the risks they face through holding gold. This may lead to a rise in its price in the short run.
At the same time, the FTSE 100 looks set to experience continued uncertainty in the short run. While this may mean that investors record paper losses over the coming weeks and months, over the coming years they may benefit from a recovery in the index’s price level.
The FTSE 100 has always delivered new record highs following its various bear markets in the past. As such, buying a wide range of companies while they trade on low valuations could be a sound means of obtaining a favourable risk/reward ratio that catalyses your portfolio’s performance in the long run. I would rather do that than buy an asset like gold that may see its price falling again once stock markets start to rise.
For example, stocks in sectors such as consumer goods, financial services and resources are currently trading on valuations that are significantly lower than their long-term averages. This suggests that investors may have factored-in the prospect of a negative impact from the coronavirus on their earnings. This could mean that they offer wide margins of safety that improve the risk/reward ratio of your portfolio.
The task of building a £1m portfolio is likely to be made easier through buying assets while they trade at low prices, and selling them when they trade at high prices. In order for shares, or any other asset, to be considered ‘cheap’, there usually must be significant risks present. As such, the near-term outlook can be highly uncertain.
However, through focusing on company fundamentals and having a long-term outlook, you can capitalise on the low valuations currently present in the FTSE 100. It may take time for the index to recover, but its track record shows that it has always achieved this goal and it could, therefore, positively impact on your chances of making a million.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Peter Stephens has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
