Some investors see gold as a safe-haven in troubled economic times. And since the middle of 2018, the price of the yellow shiny stuff has been moving higher.
But at around $1,700 per troy ounce, the spot price of gold is near its all-time high . Perhaps that reflects all the economic uncertainty we’ve seen in the world. However, when it comes to investing in gold now, for me, there’s a problem.
What if – and you’ll need to use your imagination here – what if as the coronavirus crisis fades things start to look better economically? That’s the problem with markets trading near their highs – there’s almost always a lot of room for reversals. And if you are loaded up with gold or instruments following gold, a big improvement in the economic outlook could mean a lot of downside risk for you.
I’d look for safer investments than gold. But I wouldn’t entertain putting money in a Cash ISA either. There’s just been another lurch down in interest rates and that’s a direct consequence of general economic uncertainty. When economies are weak and threatening to slump, central banks tend to use monetary policy to try to stimulate economic activity. And that means lower interest rates.
Low interest rates have become the new normal. Indeed, money salted away in cash savings is worse than dead money because it’s more likely to be losing its spending power rather than being a store of value.
Instead of gold and Cash ISAs, I’d turn to shares trading in the stock market. Studies have shown that over the long term, shares in aggregate have outperformed all other asset classes. Indeed, over long time frames, investors have seen greater returns from shares than they have from property, bonds, and cash savings, for example.
And that makes sense when you think about the resilience of many businesses underlying stocks. A business is a dynamic thing. It can grow its asset base and earnings as it expands. It can cope with inflation by putting up its selling prices. And it can gear up or down financially to suit its opportunities and to adjust to the prevailing economic conditions.
Businesses can do many things, and holding a well-diversified portfolio of company shares can be a decent route to getting rich and retiring early. But I reckon the key to successful long-term stock investing is to choose your individual shareholdings carefully. Businesses differ in their underlying strengths and weaknesses. For me, the best course of action is to deal only with the best and highest-quality stocks available.
And we can find many in the FTSE 100 index of the UK’s largest public limited companies. I’d diversify across several and aim to buy them when a short-term set-back has caused the temporary suppression of profits and share prices – such as right now!
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Kevin Godbold has no position in any share mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
