From the enforcement perspective, the inclusion of “financial interest” category is the only way the IRS can police certain cryptocurrency holders. For example, if you hold virtual currencies in decentralized exchanges, hardware/offline wallets or foreign exchanges, the IRS may not have any visibility to those transactions because those platforms do not typically report to the IRS ( How The IRS Knows You Have Crypto) . Therefore, making the taxpayer disclose these activities on Schedule 1 is the only way the regulators can get some knowledge about those holdings.
On a side note, the question about financial interest in cryptocurrencies closely resembles the question on Part III of Schedule B regarding foreign financial accounts. So, asking such a broad question is nothing new to the IRS. According to the IRS chief counsel, Michael Desmond, the Schedule B question has been very successful and the service expects to see the same success with Schedule 1 cryptocurrency question.
Here is an interesting situation where you may have to check “yes” for the cryptocurrency question as a result of owning an entity which has financial interest in cryptocurrencies. Let’s assume Jennet, Andrew & Sam pool money together and start a small bitcoin mining operation. The mining operation is registered as a LLC and taxed as a partnership. Let’s call this entity, BTC LLC. Also, each partner contributes $5,000 worth of capital and therefore owns 33.33% of interest in the entity. BTC LLC mines bitcoin throughout the year. At the end of the year, BTC LLC files a Form 1065 (U.S. Return of Partnership Income) and distributes Schedule K-1ns to Jennet, Andrew and Sam, showing their 33.33% share of income or loss. Now, here is a situation where each partner may have a “financial interest” in virtual currency through the ownership of BTC LLC. The IRS has not been explicit about whether you have to check “yes” on Schedule 1 in such situations. However, as a conservative taxpayer, it would not hurt to check “yes”.
This scenario leads to another area where practitioners need to be proactive. Going with the example above, imagine BTC LLC has 100 partners. BTC LLC tax return ( Form 1065) is prepared by one accountant and the personal returns ( Form 1040 ) are prepared by different accountants for each partner. In this case, as a best practice, it is suitable to include a footnote in each K-1 indicating that the partnership deals with virtual currencies. This way the partners and their accountants know to answer the cryptocurrency question on Form 1040 Schedule 1 accurately.
Disclaimer: this post is informational only and is not intended as tax advice. For tax advice, please consult a tax professional.
Shehan is the Head of Tax Strategy at CoinTracker.io ( bitcoin & crypto tax software ). He is one of the handful of CPAs in the country who is recognized as a real-world operator and a conceptual subject matter expert on cryptocurrency taxation.
He is a CPE instructor who has been awarded with various awards: 2019 CPA Practice Advisor 40 under 40 accounting professionals , Outstanding Young CPA of the year & Among 21 accountants mentioned on Accounting Today who will be helping shape (and reshape) accounting in 2020 and beyond by Accounting Today
Shehan is a renowned speaker who has done speaking engagements with many organizations including Google, Coinbase, Lyft, AICPA, American Bar Association, and State CPA Societies.
