Japanese government agencies held a crypto meeting, Coincheck added Qtum, and more headlined news from Japan this past week.
This week’s headlines from Japan include crypto exchange Zaif reopening account registrations, government agencies meeting on crypto, the Federation of Economic Affairs submitting a national Blockchain proposal, Coincheck adding Qtum, and Rakuten Wallet opening leverage trading account registration.
Check out some of this week’s crypto and blockchain headlines, originally reported by Cointelegraph Japan .
Japanese crypto exchange Zaif opened its doors once again for new account registrations, starting on March 6.
Hackers pilfered more that $63 million in crypto from the platform in 2018. After the hack, the company announced deposit and withdrawal suspension on Sept. 20, 2019.
Zaif also joined forces with a crypto exchange named FISCO in February 2020.
Japan’s National Police Agency, Financial Services Agency, and Consumers Affairs Agency came together for a Feb. 28 gathering on cryptocurrency exchanges and their contractors.
The entities discussed exchange checkups, contractors, communication with unregistered parties, and public notices.
Japan’s Federation of Economic Affairs and the Japan Blockchain Association, proposed a national blockchain strategy to the country’s internet technology, economy, trade, and industry ministers.
The strategy lists multiple use cases, calling Blockchain a “key technology for digital transformation,” which is “necessary to promote public-private partnership as a national strategy in the next era of the internet.”
The plan suggests creating a council focused on putting Blockchain to work for public and private partnerships. The strategy also notes expected government actions, including the formation of a game plan for the technology, as well as conducting regulatory and supervisory activities.
Crypto exchange Coincheck unveiled plans to add crypto asset Qtum (QTUM) to its platform on March 12. Coincheck will offer customers trading and lending capabilities around Qtum.
Qtum joins a list of 11 other digital assets available on the exchange.
One of technology giant Rakuten Inc.’s daughter companies, Rakuten Wallet, unveiled margin trading account registration. Customers can now open margin trading accounts on the platform and utilize 2x leverage.
Rakuten offers margin trading capabilities for Litecoin and XRP, in addition to its Bitcoin, Ethereum and Bitcoin Cash leverage trading options.
