“The return characteristics are hard to ignore,” said Matt Hougan, Bitwise managing director and global head of research. “It’s really hard to find assets not correlated with stocks and bonds that have the potential for higher returns that anyone can access.”
Rewind to 2017 and the world couldn’t get enough of cryptocurrencies. With the price of bitcoin moving higher seemingly every day it became the topic of conversations on golf courses and around water-coolers across the world.
With tales of overnight riches swirling, the price of bitcoin was driven to an all-time high of more than $2,100. Then everything came crashing down. Regulators started looking into cryptocurrencies, initial coin offerings by companies turned out to be scams in some instances and scores of investors lost a lot of money betting on a never-ending rise in the price of bitcoin. Bitcoin and cryptocurrency were written off as investors sought other ways to get exposure outside of stocks and bonds.
That all changed again in 2019 when the price of bitcoin began to climb thanks in part to the entrance of Fidelity Investments and CME into the market. That brought legitimacy to the asset class and sent it higher once again. Bitcoin ended 2019 up 90% and has been gaining since the start of the year. That hasn’t been lost on financial advisors either, and thus the growing interest in it.
“What we are seeing happen is its moving to a broader audience of advisors,” said Hougan. “The reason that’s happening is it's proven it's not going anywhere. Regulations are clearing up and major firms like Fidelity are coming into the market.”
So how are financial advisors acquiring cryptocurrencies for their clients since there isn’t a digital currency ETF in the market yet. Hougan said there are either acting in an advisory role, showing clients how to purchase crypto in a secure and safe environment, investing in the Grayscale Bitcoin Trust which trades over-the-counter or are purchasing shares in private funds that provide access to cryptocurrency like the Bitwise 10 Large Cap Crypto Index.
The financial advisors interested in cryptocurrency are also optimistic about its trajectory in the years to come. Of the survey respondents, 64% expect the price of bitcoin to increase in the next five years.That’s up from 55% in last year’s survey. Meanwhile, 34% think the price of bitcoin will at least double by 2024.
"Crypto continues to be top-of-mind for advisors searching out new and uncorrelated sources of return," said Tom Lydon, founder, and CEO of ETF Trends in a press release announcing the results. "The survey results clearly indicate growing interest in crypto from advisors and their clients alike."
A journalist for more than fifteen years, I am a freelance writer reporting on personal finance, entrepreneurship, investments, fintech and technology for a variety of
A journalist for more than fifteen years, I am a freelance writer reporting on personal finance, entrepreneurship, investments, fintech and technology for a variety of media outlets. What sets me apart from my peers is my ability to take complex topics and explain it to the masses.  After years of covering the equities markets as a technology reporter and special contributor to the Wall Street Journal, I embarked on a freelance career providing my readers with invaluable advice on everything from investing to landing a job. With the intersection between personal finance and technology getting blurred, cutting through the fintech noise and getting to the bottom of the story is becoming increasingly important to readers around the globe.
