FXCoin announced XRP remittance testing, one company began its security token initiative, and more headlined news from Japan this past week.
This week’s headlines from Japan included Mitsui & Co. Digital Asset Management kicking off its security token project, Coincheck's fiat exchange listing seven altcoins, FXCoin unveiling physical crypto trading and XRP remittance testing plans, and GMO Coin listing three more altcoins.
Check out some of this week’s crypto and blockchain headlines, originally reported by Cointelegraph Japan .
Looking to create blockchain-based security tokens , Mitsui & Co. Digital Asset Management, daughter of Japanese product and material trading giant, Mitsui & Co., recently kicked off an initiative called the "Digital Securities Project."
As part of its initial experimentation, the entity plans to work with a real estate fund. The new project also involves collaboration with blockchain company, LayerX.
Japanese exchange, Coincheck, listed seven altcoins on its fiat exchange, Coincheck Tsumitate, on April 23. The exchange's fiat branch hosted only Bitcoin ( BTC ) when it opened in fall 2019. Coincheck calls its fiat platform a "virtual currency reserve service," the exchange said in a statement .
As of the recent announcement, Coincheck Tsumitate offers Ethereum ( ETH ), Ripple's XRP , Bitcoin Cash ( BCH ), Litecoin ( LTC ), Ethereum Classic ( ETC ), Stellar ( XLM ) and Lisk ( LSK ).
FXCoin will open its platform to physical crypto trading in May, launching support for Bitcoin, with its sights set on XRP in the future.
The exchange also looks to conduct domestic and international remittance payment testing with Ripple's XRP asset. Yasuo Matsuda, FXCoin's senior strategist, noted a number of benefits crypto assets hold, while looking to harness the industry to further the financial world.
Japan's GMO Coin crypto exchange recently added three more altcoins to the mix — Basic Attention Token ( BAT ), NEM ( NEM ) and XLM.
The newly-listed assets join the platform's other five available assets — BTC, ETH, XRP, BCH and LTC.
