— Nischal (WazirX) ⚡️ (@NischalShetty) June 12, 2020
The price of Bitcoin (BTC) at the time of writing was $9410.74, with a market cap of 173.21 Bn, compared to last week (June 9, 2020) which stood at $9,696.45, with a market cap of $178.40 Bn.
Ethereum (ETH), on the other hand, was priced at $230.19, with a market cap of $25.63 Bn at the time of writing, compared to last week (June 9, 2020), where the price of the cryptocurrency was $243.28, with a market cap of $27 Bn.
Cryptocurrency News Of The Week:
CoinDCX Launches Crypto Content Platform, DCX Learn
Mumbai-based cryptocurrency exchange aggregator CoinDCX recently announced that it has launched a new online platform and subsidiary called DCX Learn, a holistic resource for cryptocurrency and blockchain educational content. As part of the #TryCrypto initiative, the company aims to onboard 50 Mn Indian crypto users in the coming days and also plans to expand its reach towards borderless financial services digital asset adoption.
CoinDCX’s cofounder and CEO Sumit Gupta, in a press release, said DCX Learn will provide users with the knowledge to navigate the crypto market. Further, CoinDCX said that the new crypto and blockchain content platform will provide learning materials in the form of guides, articles, online courses, interactive lectures and free quizzes and more.
The national science foundation (NSF), an independent agency of the US government, awarded a $225K research grant to KRNC, a Los Angeles-based blockchain startup to create a new protocol that could add crypto features to their current fiat currency (government-issued currency). Clint Ehrlich, the project’s chief scientist, said in a press release that KRNC takes the influence of Bitcoin and adds them to money the public already owns. “It is the virtual equivalent of taping gold to everyone’s dollar bills,” he added.
According to a recent survey posted by BITMAX, a Singapore-based cryptocurrency trading platform stated that nearly 25% of the 1,498 people surveyed said that Ripple (XRP) was their favourite cryptocurrency, compared to 26% who preferred BTC and 9% who preferred ETH. Last year, Japan Virtual Currency Exchange Association (JVCEA) also had reported similar findings, where XRP was second behind BTC and ETH.
Wilmington-based peer-to-peer bitcoin marketplace recently announced that it has collaborated with Malta-based crypto exchange platform, OKEx for the conversion of fiat-to-crypto payment capabilities. With this, OKEx users will not be able to buy bitcoin with over 160 fiat currencies, as well as access gift cards, online wallets, domestic wire transfers and more.
Ray Youssef, cofounder and CEO at Paxful said, with this partnership, we hope to continue to build the ecosystem together and make crypto more accessible as a real-world payment method.
