CASTLE ROCK, Colo. - April 30, 2020 (Investorideas.com Newswire) Riot Blockchain, Inc. ( NASDAQ: RIOT ) ("Riot" or the "Company"), one of the few Nasdaq listed public cryptocurrency mining companies in the United States, is contributing a total of $100,000 to hospitals in its areas of operations to aid local hospitals' COVID-19 relief efforts.
After considering how to most effectively help its local communities battle the global COVID-19 pandemic, Riot and its board of directors have opted to donate $50,000 to Mercy Hospital Oklahoma City, which is near the Company's mining facility, and $50,000 to Castle Rock Adventist Hospital, which is near the Company's headquarters in Castle Rock, Colorado.
"Mercy is incredibly grateful for Riot Blockchain's support during this challenging time in history," said Jim Gebhart, president of Mercy Hospital Oklahoma City and regional strategy officer. "Currently, Mercy is preparing for a possible surge of COVID-19 patients, and this generous donation will provide funding for critical medical equipment that can help save lives today, and into the future. We are overwhelmed by the generosity of organizations and business professionals willing to make sacrifices for the well-being of others."
Brandon Nudd, CEO of Castle Rock Adventist Hospital, commented: "During these unprecedented times, we want to publicly acknowledge and express our deep gratitude to Riot Blockchain for supporting Castle Rock Adventist Hospital through their philanthropic donation of $50,000. By investing in our community hospital, Riot Blockchain is providing encouragement to our care teams, creating opportunities for a nimble response to critical healthcare needs, and helping us continue to provide exceptional, compassionate care to every patient. On behalf of our hospital administrators, frontline caregivers, our patients, and every person in our community, we'd like to respectfully thank Riot Blockchain for their incredible generosity, which will make a difference in the lives of many."
Riot Blockchain (NASDAQ: RIOT) specializes in cryptocurrency mining with a focus on bitcoin. Riot also holds non-controlling investments in blockchain technology companies. Riot is headquartered in Castle Rock, Colorado, and the Company's mining facility is located in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. For more information, visit www.RiotBlockchain.com .
The information provided in this press release may include forward-looking statements relating to future events or the future financial performance of the Company. Because such statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Words such as "anticipates," "plans," "expects," "intends," "will," "potential," "hope" and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are based upon current expectations of the Company and involve assumptions that may never materialize or may prove to be incorrect. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in such forward-looking statements as a result of various risks and uncertainties. Detailed information regarding factors that may cause actual results to differ materially from the results expressed or implied by statements in this press release relating to the Company may be found in the Company's periodic filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including the factors described in the sections entitled "Risk Factors," copies of which may be obtained from the SEC's website at www.sec.gov. The Company does not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements contained in this press release.
Disclaimer/Disclosure: Investorideas.com is a digital publisher of third party sourced news, articles and equity research as well as creates original content, including video, interviews and articles. Original content created by investorideas is protected by copyright laws other than syndication rights. Our site does not make recommendations for purchases or sale of stocks, services or products. Nothing on our sites should be construed as an offer or solicitation to buy or sell products or securities. All investing involves risk and possible losses. This site is currently compensated for news publication and distribution, social media and marketing, content creation and more. Disclosure is posted for each compensated news release, content published /created if required but otherwise the news was not compensated for and was published for the sole interest of our readers and followers. Contact management and IR of each company directly regarding specific questions.
Global investors must adhere to regulations of each country. Please read Investorideas.com privacy policy: https://www.investorideas.com/About/Private_Policy.asp
