Chicago cryptocurrency mining company EZ Blockchain is eyeing natural gas being flared in the Permian Basin of West Texas as a potential source of power for mobile servers to create cryptocurrencies and put them into circulation.
Chicago cryptocurrency mining company EZ Blockchain is eyeing the large volumes of wasted natural gas being burned in the Permian Basin of West Texas as a potential source of power for portable servers to create digital currencies and put them into circulation.
EZ Blockchain recently deployed a natural gas generator and a 40-foot container filled with more than 700 computer servers off the East Coast where a stranded source of natural gas is being used to generate roughly 2.5 megawatts of electricity.
Similar generators and server combos are being deployed at stranded gas locations in the Midwest and Bakken Shale but the company's vice president of business development Christopher Thomas said the large volumes of natural gas being wasted and burned at Permian Basin oil wells can instead be used to create Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
"We try to find the cheapest electricity possible, so we target stranded gas and there is a lot of it in the Permian," Thomas said.
Oil companies operating in the Permian Basin of West Texas burned and wasted a record 238.1 billion cubic feet of natural gas worth an estimated $750 million in 2018, according to a recent report from the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis.
EZ Blockchain is seeking to partner with oil well operators in the West Texas shale play and developing trailers that provide enough air conditioning to keep the servers cool in the desert heat.
"We have to have everything perfect when we come to Texas," Thomas said.
Sergio Chapa covers the oil & gas industry for the Houston Chronicle and writes for Texas Inc., a weekly Monday insert dedicated to covering the most powerful business leaders in Texas. Sergio was born and raised in the Lone Star State and studied journalism at the University of Texas at Austin. He previously worked at the San Antonio Business Journal, KGBT-TV in the Rio Grande Valley and Al Día in Dallas.
Past Articles from this Author:
