When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to go to the desired page. Touch device users, explore by touch or with swipe gestures.
Curv attracts $23 million in a Series A funding round as it ramps up its international growth.
Get daily crypto briefings and weekly Bitcoin market reports delivered right to your inbox.
Curv offers multi-party computation (MPC) security technology.
Wall Street continues to eye off crypto as the regulatory environment becomes clearer.
Institutional investors demand the level of security Curv offers.
This Exchange News was brought to you by OKCoin, our preferred Exchange Partner.
Curv , a crypto-security provider for institutional investors, has announced a $23 million Series A funding raise, with investments from CommerzVentures, Coinbase Ventures, Digital Currency Group, Team8, and Digital Garage Lab Fund.
Curv will use these funds used to continue its international growth, product innovations, and hiring top talent.
The firm is driving traditional institutional and crypto-native demand for digital assets through its multi-party computation (MPC) security technology, a critical requirement to safely transfer, store, and manage any digital asset on any blockchain or DLT.
Curv is used by dozens of customers across the globe, including global investment firm Franklin Templeton, which leverages Curv’s infrastructure , as well as crypto-native institutions such as eToro and Genesis.
According to a recent survey by Fidelity Digital Assets, nearly 80 percent of institutional investors in the U.S. and Europe see the appeal of digital assets, including more than a third who have already invested in the market.
More investors also have exposure to derivatives , according to the poll.
The percentage of U.S. investors with exposure to cryptocurrency futures increased from nine percent in 2019 to 22 percent in 2020. Curv CEO Itay Malinger said on the findings that:
“Despite a challenging economic climate, we’re seeing strong growth among traditional financial institutions, who require our enterprise-grade security infrastructure, robust governance engine and seamless integration with blockchain technology. Unlike other legacy solutions, we simultaneously deliver the protection, instant liquidity, and complete control required for all institutions to thrive in the digital asset economy.”
Curv’s keyless MPC technology and flexible tech stack allow crypto-native and traditional financial institutions to build world-class crypto finance products.
They support hot, warm, and cold wallet configurations as well as all tokens and protocols regardless of the underlying blockchain or DLT.
As regulators around the world begin to provide further guidance around digital assets, both Wall Street and global financial institutions are preparing themselves .
Curv’s MPC technology plays a vital role in this by providing institutions with greater flexibility in adapting to and complying with these changing regulatory requirements surrounding governance, auditing, and capital requirements.
This flexibility is achieved via the deployment of Curv’s diverse signing mechanisms and offline storage schemas for key management. Air Gap is one such solution that allows institutions to supplement their online transactional wallet with an offline, air-gapped machine for signing transactions.
The Curv Air Gap’s keyless cryptography also solves key security risks of cold wallets — like insider threats, human error, and physical damage, freeing institutions from having to make suboptimal tradeoffs between security and asset availability.
The information on or accessed through this website is obtained from independent sources we believe to be accurate and reliable, but Decentral Media, Inc. makes no representation or warranty as to the timeliness, completeness, or accuracy of any information on or accessed through this website. Decentral Media, Inc. is not an investment advisor. We do not give personalized investment advice or other financial advice. The information on this website is subject to change without notice. Some or all of the information on this website may become outdated, or it may be or become incomplete or inaccurate. We may, but are not obligated to, update any outdated, incomplete, or inaccurate information.
You should never make an investment decision on an ICO, IEO, or other investment based on the information on this website, and you should never interpret or otherwise rely on any of the information on this website as investment advice. We strongly recommend that you consult a licensed investment advisor or other qualified financial professional if you are seeking investment advice on an ICO, IEO, or other investment. We do not accept compensation in any form for analyzing or reporting on any ICO, IEO, cryptocurrency, currency, tokenized sales, securities, or commodities.
