How can DeFi platforms be built and operated in a safe way? Who benefits from DeFi the most, and what role will these systems play in our future?
Finance Magnates is happy to present the next installment in our live webinar series : next week, we’ll be joined by four of the cryptocurrency industry’s most prominent experts–Teana Baker-Taylor, Alex Mashinsky, Brian Norton, and Lex Sokolin–to discuss an increasingly relevant topic in the cryptosphere: the ups and downs of decentralized financial systems, or ‘DeFi.’
There are a limited number of free spots still available for attendees. Click here & register now to secure yours.
Finance Magnates has hand-selected a group of experts to discuss the evolution of DeFi from different places in the DeFi ecosystem. Together, these four panelists offer a comprehensive view of how far DeFi has come, and how far it still needs to go.
Alex Mashinsky, founder and CEO of Celsius.
Alex Mashinsky is a serial entrepreneur and founder of seven New York City-based startups, raising more than $1 billion and exiting over $3 billion. One of the companies that Alex has founded, Celsius Network, runs on top of the Ethereum network.
Did COVID-19 Save the Forex Industry? Go to article >>
Teana Baker-Taylor is the UK Director at cryptocurrency exchange Binance. Binance’s ecosystem includes a decentralized exchange. Previously, Teana was the Executive Director and board member of Global Digital Finance, a not-for-profit initiative fostering discussion on global policy and governance for blockchain and digital assets with policymakers, regulators, and industry participants.
Lex Sokolin, futurist and entrepreneur working on the next generation of financial services, serves as the chief marketing officer and Global Fintech Co-Head at ConsenSys, a blockchain technology company building the infrastructure, applications, and practices that enable a decentralized world.
Lex Sokolin, CMO and Global Fintech Co-Head at ConsenSys.
Brian Norton, Chief Operations Officer of MEW (MyEtherWallet) , has built years of startup operational management experience in industries across the tech space, including edtech, industrial automation, and now blockchain. Brian’s work at MEW is inspired by the idea that blockchain technology, designed for everyday life, will change the way we live for the better in ways we can not yet imagine.
The panel will be moderated by Rachel McIntosh, podcast host, and cryptocurrency industry journalist at Finance Magnates.
This panel discussion presents an invaluable opportunity for you, your firm, and your friends to gain invaluable insight into the future of DeFi. Finance Magnates would love to see you there: bring your questions, comments, and ideas.
