Bitbuddy is a bitcoin marketplace that allows sellers and shoppers to sell and buy directly on its platform. As an over-the-counter marketplace exclusively dedicated to bitcoins, it focuses on providing the best values and introductory offers in the market. Bitbuddy believes that investment in crypto assets is the need of the hour and investors will soon prefer Bitcoin over other traditional investment opportunities. It allows buyers to buy any volume of Bitcoin instantly. BitBuddy is available on both iOS and Play store.
WazirX is a Cryptocurrency exchange that offers customers an advanced trading interface and features to Buy, Sell & Trade cryptocurrencies. WazirX also offers a Live Open Order Book system that lets you trade digital assets like Bitcoin, Bitcoin Cash, Litecoin, Dash etc. One can deposit/withdraw cryptocurrencies and also cash in/cash out USDT via P2P with amazing ease and speed, as well as securely store ones digital assets in your WazirX wallet.
Unocoin is a bitcoin exchange that enables users to buy/sell bitcoin by matching their order with other users. It provides a platform for users to buy or sell bitcoin with INR. It has launched a user mobile app that enables users to buy, sell, store, accept and use bitcoin on the go. Unocoin provides customers a special bitcoin address which auto sells Bitcoin.
ZebPay trades cryptocurrencies in over 130 countries across the globe! It is a secure crypto exchange trusted by over 3 million people worldwide. Zebpay provides one of the easy ways to buy and sell Bitcoin, Ethereum, Ripple, EOS and many other cryptocurrencies. Its cryptocurrency exchange app for Android offers a seamless mobile trading experience on the go.
CoinSwitch provides a cryptocurrency exchange aggregator platform that help users trade cryptocurrencies with ease and at cheaper rates. It allows the cryptocurrency trading and users to trade over 400+ cryptocurrencies, along with an ability to buy cryptocurrency with a credit card at the best price.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
