Stocks rallied Tuesday, as the Dow climbed to another test of resistance and the Nasdaq aimed to add an eighth day to its advance. U.S. and European stocks recived a boost from stronger than expected economic data. China-based stocks showed early strength after an overnight reversal in U.S.-China trade worries. Nike climbed on the Dow Jones today, following an upgrade ahead of its fourth-quarter report.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average trimmed its climb to 0.8%. The S&P 500 swung up 0.7%, also off highs. The Nasdaq traded up 0.8%, sticking close to its highs on the stock market today . Small caps outpaced the early gains, with the Russell 2000 up 1.4%. Trading volume was mixed, higher on the Nasdaq, lower on the NYSE, vs. action at the same time Monday.
China stocks were mixed after the White House smoothed over fears regarding U.S.-China trade relations raised in a Monday night Fox interview. Heavyweight internet provider Tencent Holdings ( TCEHY ) jumped more than 3%. Video game leader NetEase ( NTES ) gained 1.4%. E-commerce giant Alibaba Group Holdings ( BABA ) jumped 1.6%.
Oil stocks helped boost the S&P 500, as oil rose past its early June high to its best level since the start of March. Flooring leader Mohawk ( MHK ) and restaurant supplier Sysco ( SYY ) led the index, up 8% and 7%, respectively.
Translate Bio ( TBIO ) erupted in a 53% spike, after news that Sanofi's ( SNY ) vaccine unit had expanded its relationship with the Lexingon, Mass.-based biotech. The partnership will aim to develop mRNA vaccines for infectious diseases. Sanofi shares edged up 0.5%.
The contraction in the U.S. economy slowed sharply in June, according to preliminary estimates for composite purchasing managers index for June from  IHS Markit. The group's Composite Output Index rose to 46.8 for the month, up from a 36.4 reading in May and above estimates for 45. Some firms noted a regbound in client demand, but said renewals and requests for new business were muted.
Markets across Europe also rallied, boosted by a second straight monthly surprise in PMI data. Economies in Europe and France reboounded much more sharply than expected. The Composite Eurozone PMI index rose to 47.5, up from 31.9 in May and far above consensus views for 42.4.
New home sales numbers for May are due from the Commerce Department at 10 a.m. ET.
Markets will keep an close ear on news from the White House, as it wrestles to bring under control the message on trade relations with China. Top trade official Peter Navarro told Fox News Monday evening that the China trade deal was "over ." Navarro later clarified he did not mean the phase 1 deal was canceled, but that trust with Beijing had been broken over the handling of that country's coronavirus outbreak.
President Donald Trump tweeted Monday night, "The China Trade Deal is fully intact. Hopefully they will continue to live up to the terms of the Agreement!"
Nike ( NKE ) and Apple ( AAPL ) rumbled high on the Dow Jones today. Shares of Nike jumped 1.6% as BTIG boosted its price target to 117, from 108, ahead of Nike's fiscal Q4 report on Thursday. The stock had received target hikes from JPMorgan, UBS and Piper Sandler on Monday.
Apple basked in a triple price hike, with Bernstein, Deutsche Bank and UBS hoisting their price targets. A Citi report Tuesday said the iPhone maker's transition to in-house chip designs for its Mac lines could save the company $850 million a year, and is likely to require two years to execute. Bernstein valued the transition as immaterial to company financials.
Apple shares gained 1.5% early Tuesday, and are extended above buy points at 288.35 and 319.79. It is in a profit-taking zone above the 288.35 entry. Apple is listed on IBD's Leaderboard premium stock-tracking service.
China-based educator GSX Techedu ( GSX ) swept up 2.8% to grab the early lead among IBD 50 stocks. Shares are extended after a breakout above a 46.50 buy point on June 15.
IBD 50 peer PayPal ( PYPL ) climbed 1.2%, rising after CoinDesk reported the company plans to open both PayPal and Venmo to cryptocurrency sales and purchases. PayPal is extended, just above the buy range of the three-weeks tight pattern . PayPal is listed on IBD's Leaderboard premium stock-tracking service.
Globally, another 142,000 persons were identified with cases of coronavirus, lifting the running tally of cases since the start of the outbreak 1.6% to above 9.209 million. Deaths rose 0.8%, another 3,771 persons dead, to a total of 474,798, according to Worldometer data. Cases among countries of the European Economic Area slipped to about 16% of the global total. Deaths in EEA countries held steady at 37% of the total, based on data from the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control . U.S. cases were also steady, at 26% of the worldwide total, and 26% of the deaths.
Brazil reported more than 24,000 new cases in the 24 hours to Tuesday morning, a 2.2% increase, giving Brazil 12% of the world's coronavirus caseload.
Russia held its new cases to well below 10,000 for another day, though the slowed growth in new cases could be linked to declines in testing. India confirmed almost 15,000 new cases. Mexico's new case count rose to nearly 5,000. Numbers were also high in Pakistan, Bangladesh and Saudi Arabia. In China, a flare up in new cases in Beijing has reportedly been brought under control with aggressive measures that included the lockdown of 10 districts within the city, according to the South China Morning Post . The outbreak, linked to a wholesale food market, had infected 249 persons since June 11.
In the U.S., another 31,510 confirmed cases raised the tally of persons infected since the start of the out break 1.3% to more than 2.388 million. Deaths rose by 0.3%, another 363 persons reported dead in the 24-hour period. Growth in new cases remained below 0.2% in New York and New Jersey. California's new cases rose by more than 3%. Idaho saw the biggest 24-hour jump in the U.S., up more than 6%. Texas continued adding new cases at a 4.4% rate.
Texas Gov. Greg Abbott told reported Monday that new cases in Texas had risen from an average of 1,500 on May to a current daily average of 3,500.  "To state the obvious," Abbott said, "COVID-19 is now spreading at an unacceptable rate in Texas."
Montana, Utah, Florida and Wisconsin expanded by more than 3%. Arizona's growth slowed slightly, to less than 5%. North Carolina slowed from almost 3% to below 2%. Daily growth rates can bounce up and down, based largely on the number of persons tested.
Testing in the U.S. slowed sharply, from well over 500,000 per day over the past three days, to below 465,000 tests administered on Monday, according to the COVID Tracking Project . That left the 10-day average for tests just above 500,000. The number of active cases in the U.S. rose for a tenth straight day, to a new record above 1.26 million. Actives cases, which are infected patients either in hospitals or under supervised quarantine, helps track rising pressure on healthcare facilities and workers in states showing the highest rates of infection growth.
The Nasdaq is in the midst of its longest advance since December, with a seven-day run up nudging the index to its second close above 10,000 this month. The Dow Jones today gets another change to break its recent trend, of crawling sideways, below its 200-day line. The S&P 500 is moving sideways just above its 200-day line, and holding above the 3,000 level.
The chart for the Russell 2000 small cap gauge currently looks a lot like that of the Dow, although the Russell is not quite as tight, and slightly further below its 200-day average. Trade on both indexes has been weak over the past seven session, with the exception of Friday's quadruple witching session. The Russell index reconstitution points to a big volume surge, at least on the Russell 2000, on Friday.
For more detailed analysis of the current stock market and its status, study the Big Picture .
It's not yet clear what it will take to kick the Dow and Russell out of their current holding patterns. China trade, the coronavirus pandemic and economy and a looming presidential election are all part of the picture. The message behind the Dow's battle to take its 200-day line, and the Nasdaq's tussle with the 10,000 level remain unclear.
Other signals are mixed. Gold on Monday rose to its highest level Since Oct. 2012, a bearish sign. Oil, on the other hand, was bullish, recovering to its highest level since early March. Growth stocks continue to outperform , with the Innovator IBD 50 ETF ( FFTY ) up 1.6% yesterday — its sixth advance in the past seven days.
The IBD 50 has been keeping abreast of the Nasdaq this year, but is now up 15.2% year-to-date and beating the composite's 14.1% increase. The S&P 500 is down 3.5%.
For the time being, the stock market's confirmed uptrend remains intact. Investors should buy tactically, take profit in profit-taking zones, keep sell rules close by and an eye out for a shift in market behavior.
