Elon Musk once again stirred up the crypto industry by going back and forth with the owner of the @Bitcoin.
Musk is known for being a fan of crypto, although he never admitted to being an investor.
His large fan base on Twitter has plenty of crypto and tech enthusiasts, who appreciate these mentions.
Elon Musk, the CEO of Tesla, is not a cryptocurrency investor, according to his own claims. However, for someone who is trying to stand aside and not get involved with the crypto industry, he often does the exact opposite.
Musk has had a long history with dropping casual mentions of Bitcoin, Ethereum, and even Dogecoin on Twitter. He would often ‘drop a Bitcoin bomb,’ as the community likes to call it, without any cause or a warning.
In January of this year, he simply said ‘Bitcoin is *not* my safe word,’ and the tweet went viral. This has happened many times before, and the billionaire would make headlines each time when he mentioned Bitcoin.
Considering that he is not an investor, the only other reason for this is to stir up the crypto industry from time to time. Now, Musk did it again yesterday, May 1st. He tweeted about Bitcoin twice, which caused quite a strong response.
Musk’s original tweet did not actually have anything to do with Bitcoin. Instead, he stirred up the financial world by tweeting about Tesla’s stock price. He simply said that “Tesla stock price is too high imo.” As a result, the asset collapsed by around 10% by the end of the day’s trading session.
— Elon Musk (@elonmusk) May 1, 2020
Of course, not a lot of people thought this was funny. In fact, many of those who hold TSLA saw this behavior as controversial, as it impacted their investment quite a bit. Immediately after that, the person behind Twitter’s @Bitcoin account commented on Musk’s tweet.
— Bitcoin (@Bitcoin) May 1, 2020
Their response simply said ‘Bitcoin price is too low imo.’ However, it did not end with that, as Musk decided to surprise everyone by actually responding. He asked “How much for some anime Bitcoin?” only to get a response “The same cost as wizard Bitcoin. 1BTC = 1BTC.” To this, Muck responded with laughing emojis.
— Elon Musk (@elonmusk) May 1, 2020
Obviously, Musk’s new round of Bitcoin comments was made as a joke, although he did admit to being a fan of crypto and blockchain. He called Bitcoin ‘brilliant,’ and said that Ethereum ‘deserves merit,’ while openly stating that DOGE is his ‘favorite cryptocurrency.’
A journalist, with experience in web journalism and marketing. Ali holds a master's degree in finance and enjoys writing about cryptocurrencies and fintech. Ali’s work has been published on a number of cryptocurrency publications. Raza is the co-founder of 5Gist.com, too, a site dedicated to educating people on 5G technology.
