In April last year, Musk surprised bitcoin and cryptocurrency watchers by saying that the meme-based dogecoin is his "fav" cryptocurrency in response to a Twitter poll that found him to be the favorite to take on the mantle of dogecoin CEO, with 49% of the vote.
However, Musk has recently rowed back his previous bitcoin praise, telling the Tesla-focused podcast Third Row in January he is "neither here nor there on bitcoin," raising concerns about its use for illegal transactions.
The price of dogecoin jumped yesterday after Elon Musk shared his ongoing support for the minor ... [+] bitcoin rival.
Dogecoin has found other high-profile supporters as well as Musk. Last year, John McAfee, the millionaire creator of McAfee security software-turned U.S. presidential hopeful and globe-trotting adventurer, praised dogecoin as "one of the fastest growing coins based on use."
"Doge started life as joke/prank coin," McAfee said via Twitter . "The coin now has a market cap of $360 million. The crypto market is, in no way, related to the stock market. Inherent value is, ultimately, based on usage. Go figure."
Dogecoin, surprisingly one of the oldest bitcoin rivals, was created in 2013 by a then 26-year-old Australian Jackson Palmer and American programmer Billy Markus after joking about it on Twitter.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
