By Maheen Hernandez July 1, 2020 Off
For those who missed the information, ETC has been increasingly attractive.  Of note, HIVE OS have recently added the mining support.
Hive OS recently tweeted: “We’re launching the Ethereum Classic Mining Pool. Both free and paid Hive OS users who switch to the ETC pool can use HIVE OS for free until 19.06.2020. From 20.06.2020, the conditions will be the same as for mining ETH on Hiveon Pool.”
While HIVE OS have been adding mining support, Ethereum Classic have their own plans for their future tasks in 2020.
Ethereum Classic tweeted: “@BobSummerwill shares what’s planned for #EthereumClassic in 2020 + what the future holds for @eth_classic, while Yaz gives an overview of dev relations and activity in $ETC. ICYMI: @ETCCooperative Accelerates the Growth of Ethereum Classic.”
While every cryptocurrency recently has to state that they are not competitors to Bitcoin, there was a comment from Sydney Ifergan on how we ultimately benefit.
Someone from the Litecoin community stated that they are not competing with Bitcoin.  Similarly, the Ethereum Classic also recently stated that they are not in any way undermining Bitcoin or its purpose or vision, but stated that ETC is complementary to BTC with their L1 smart contracts. So, it is good that none of them are competing with each other, they are trying to do their best for their individual goals and investors are those actually comparing things up and making the rest feel like one is superior to another.
There are a lot of virtual summits happening and all of them are doing absolutely great.  Whether at ETHGlobal or elsewhere, one of the ETC community enthusiast has to state that nothing beats the experience of going to a real place and connecting in person.
Several other members acknowledge, stating that making initial meaningful connections remotely is tough, and that Summits are a luxury.  While it is natural to miss the in-person events absolutely summits are worth the time with experts. With little focus, it is possible to focus on technicalities.
DeFi will not get destroyed.  It is all set to grow, mature and become resilient to create value more than just the techies. There will be a point in time where the merits of all the virtual summits will evolve to a well-rounded technology making it possible for the common man to feel the magic of future. People’s lives are going to improve and the communities are going to benefit from DeFi.
