Even before the COVID-19 pandemic really swung into action and the WHO encouraged contactless payments while central banks quarantined physical bills, the ECB called banknotes out for limited efficiency and old technology. This is a problem that is now being seen across the world as countries try to get stimulus dollars to their citizens.
Patchwork legacy systems, from mailed paper cheques, to handing out physical banknotes are ill-suited to quickly get money in the hands of people who need it, and there are many efficiency losses along the way: for example, in 2017, the FDIC indicated about 8.4 million households in the United States were unbanked , meaning any cheques this group would get would likely lose value through inefficient manners of deposit forced on them by lack of access to conventional banking.
It’s clear that certain central bankers see banknotes as an “old technology” and want to absorb some of the benefits of digitization: immediacy, relative security and efficiency. The need for this has grown ever faster with an urgent fiscal and monetary response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These are likely going to be the key arguments of anybody looking to advance central bank digital currency in the United States, and they will all imply a greater degree of control for central banks.
2) Worry about money laundering means that privacy/anonymity will likely take a backseat.
The working paper contains a direct reference to deposit based central bank digital currency (assumably taking some amount of metadata and registration to access) being superior for controlling illicit activity rather than more privacy-enabling token-based systems.
While the latter is not outright banned, the use case is seen more for tourists. Right now “value” is created by giving deposits to trusted intermediaries: regulated private banks. The ECB proposes that scaling the deposit system from the current 10,000 accounts to the 300-500mn business and personal accounts in the Eurozone be “assigned to one or several thirdparty providers” — assumably large digitization-oriented corporations that the ECB will trust and subject to European laws.
While that might be great news for those corporations, it calls into question the amount of data these contractors and the ECB will hold over the financial transactions between essentially everybody based in Europe — and what could be done with such data in terms of tracking the finer details of everybody’s life.
This detail is given a glance-over with the assumption that legal protections will apply for the privacy of digital financial information, but one only has to see the consumer demand for end-to-end encryption, even in the face of the judicial interpretation of the Fourth Amendment, to see that this flies in the face of individual preferences in the digital age — and given the reality of warrantless surveillance in the United States, it also flies in the face of how governments have treated individual data.
3) Central banks love digital currency as a means of exchange, but absolutely deplore it as a store of value
The working paper expresses this as its central thesis: that digital currency must be tiered in such a way that it represents an effective means of digital exchange but be disincentivized as a store of value through a variety of methods, from tiered interest rates, to stopping the effective swapping of digital currency with conventional bank deposits. Essentially, central banks want the near-instant transfer powers of digital wallets, but none of the technological or ideological preferences within Bitcoin, from decentralized peer decision-making to finite supply.
It’s clear that the ECB, as custodian of the conventional banking system, wants to grab at the benefits of digitization while ensuring as much as possible that the current system thrives and is not “disintermediated” through the use of new digital currencies. This is a structural argument which is of course counter to the central tenets of cryptocurrencies. Rather than reforming underlying structural issues, central bank digital currency is meant to merely shore up the existing system and gloss over old inefficiencies in paper banknotes. Cryptocurrency advocates should expect the same attitude in the United States and around the world.
In conclusion, the attitudes expressed in the ECBs working paper on central bank digital currencies shows that central banks have tacked onto the problems with cash and conventional banknotes quite sharply, and are looking at digitization as the primary solution. Momentum on this front can only be expanded with the rise of the COVID-19 pandemic and the urgent stimulus response it is pushing forward.
People in the cryptocurrency community who expect a government-backed store of value in digital form, or the prioritization of anonymity and privacy of individual-level users in the face of the possibility of instant, comprehensive financial surveillance should, however, think again.
I was one of the first writers in 2014 to write about the intersection of blockchain in remittance payments and drug policy with VentureBeat and TechCrunch. Since then,
I was one of the first writers in 2014 to write about the intersection of blockchain in remittance payments and drug policy with VentureBeat and TechCrunch. Since then, I've been an early long-term HODLer of Ethereum, and I've built several mini-projects with blockchain for fun. I'd like to learn as much as possible about our decentralized future while sharing that knowledge with you.
