Facebook launches cryptocurrency Libra coin, stock jumps
Digital payment venture will be backed by more than two dozen companies, including Mastercard and PayPal
Facebook Inc. said Tuesday it will roll out its highly anticipated digital currency next year, intended to be used to make payments over the internet as well as on its social-media platform.
The cryptocurrency called Libra coin uses blockchain, the digital-ledger technology that underpins cryptocurrencies like bitcoin BTCUSD,
to make it less prone to the wild prices swings associated with bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
The news sent Facebook’s stock FB,
The move is widely viewed as an implicit endorsement of the blockchain technology and to a lesser extent crypto assets, which were first created back in 2009 when a person or persons known as Satoshi Nakamoto minted the first bitcoin.
The Facebook digital payment venture will be backed by more than two dozen companies, including Mastercard Inc. MA,
. The cryptocurrency will be overseen by a Geneva-based company called Libra Association, with many of the aforementioned backers serving as members of the independent organization.
Facebook is also creating a digital wallet called Calibra that allows users to safely store their Libra coins.
Facebook’s stock has been on a tear, since closing at a two-month low on June 3. Since then, the stock has soared 15%, gaining ground in nine of 10 sessions through Monday. It has run up 44.2% year to date, while the Nasdaq Composite COMP,
Plug Power's 'rapid growth' hopes leads to price target increase at J.P. Morgan
Analysts at J.P. Morgan increased their price target on Plug Power Inc.  shares, saying they expect "rapid growth" for the hydrogen fuel-cell company. The analysts moved their price target to $8.50, from $6, implying a 6% upside for the shares, and kept their rating at their equivalent of hold. Plug Power's fuel-cell forklifts, used in warehousing, allow customers such as Amazon.com Inc.  and Wal-Mart Inc.  to save money and improve productivity, the analysts said in a note Tuesday. The company also enjoys a "leading position" in hydrogen fueling infrastructure, which could be more efficient for commercial trucking than battery power, J.P. Morgan said. Plug Power shares have gained 154% this year, contrasting with losses around 5% and 11% for the S&P 500 index  and the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
