Please consider using a different web browser for better experience.
Please enable JavaScript in your browser for a better site experience.
Fresh off releasing the white paper for its Libra cryptocurrency, Facebook is looking to hire a finance program manager in blockchain, according to a new job posting.
The job description gives few specifics and no mention of its relation to the Libra project.
“This individual will be a key part of the Finance Project Management Organization and will be responsible for planning, leading and executing on global, cross-functional finance projects,” the description says. Facebook did not respond to questions by press time.
Facebook’s career website now has 26 blockchain-related job openings , who would join the former staffers of the blockchain startup Chainspace whom Facebook hired earlier this year.
The finance program manager position requires more than eight years of project management experience and some experience with blockchain tech. Responsibilities include planning, leading and executing projects in collaboration with other teams globally, developing business cases, ensuring sponsorship and getting stakeholders on board with those initiatives’ goals.
The program manager would also develop effective communication with clients and shareholders, determine business roles and resources needed for projects, analyze potential risks and ensure the projects’ compliance with tax laws, the U.S. Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other regulations.
Facebook made waves this week publishing the details of its plan for a global currency with the support of such companies as Uber, Lyft, PayPal, Visa, and Mastercard. The impact for the crypto industry could be huge, some experts are predicting , bringing massive public attention to the space.
However, some crypto professionals are concerned that Libra would give Facebook and its partners enormous control over users’ financial data. Such concerns led Stellar, Tendermint and MobileCoin to decline to work with Facebook, CoinDesk’s sources said.
Facebook blockchain exec David Marcus image via CoinDesk archives.
The leader in blockchain news, CoinDesk is a media outlet that strives for the highest journalistic standards and abides by a strict set of editorial policies . CoinDesk is an independent operating subsidiary of Digital Currency Group, which invests in cryptocurrencies and blockchain startups.
