By Vince Martin , InvestorPlace Contributor Jun 15, 2018, 3:07 pm EDT
Unless you’ve been living under a rock, you know that the narrative surrounding broad markets — it’s been one of strife since late January until the recent rally. Volatility spiked and the S&P 500 Index still sits almost 3% below late-January highs.
But for the Nasdaq-100 index — the 100 largest stocks, by market capitalization, listed on the Nasdaq Composite stock exchange — the news has been a little better.
Helped in large part by big gains in Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ: AMZN ) and Netflix, Inc. (NASDAQ: NFLX ), along with strength in its largest component, Apple Inc. (NASDAQ: AAPL ), the Nasdaq has gained 13% so far this year. And the index actually now sits at an all-time high.
Investors looking for exposure to the index can buy the well-known PowerShares QQQ Trust (NASDAQ: QQQ ) ETF. But many components of the index look attractive at current levels as well — even with the index at the highs.
Here are 20 of the best Nasdaq stocks investors should consider for the second half of 2018 and beyond.
Three different video game developers are included in the Nasdaq-100, and from here Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc (NASDAQ: TTWO ) looks like the best play. I’ve recommended Electronic Arts Inc. (NASDAQ: EA ) in the past, but a recent rally has moved that stock closer to fair value .
The reliance of Activision Blizzard, Inc. (NASDAQ: ATVI ) on declining World of Warcraft and relatively stagnant Call of Duty looks like a concern .
Meanwhile, it’s been smaller Take-Two that has been the best performer in the group over 1-, 3- and 5-year periods. Just as I argued earlier this year, Take-Two remains the best play in the space going forward . Concerns about Red Dead Redemption 2 have dogged the stock of late but those short-term issues leave a long-term buying opportunity.
TTWO stock isn’t cheap, but there’s plenty of room to grow into that valuation from revenue increases and margin expansion. The stock only has gained about 4% so far in 2018, but I expect much better performance in the second half.
20 Best Nasdaq-100 Stocks to Buy: JD.com (JD)
After a round-trip from $36 to $50 and back again, JD.com Inc(ADR) (NASDAQ: JD ) has seen a nice bounce over the past couple of weeks, gaining over 15%. And it looks like the Chinese e-commerce provider could be set up for a nice rally in the second half of the year.
This remains a cutting-edge stock with a chance to take market share from Chinese leader Alibaba Group Holding Ltd (NYSE: BABA ). Growth has been impressive from a revenue standpoint, with margins taking a hit from aggressive investments.
Unlike Alibaba, JD.com holds inventory, which affects its financials, but also gives it more room for upside as its supply chain is built out.
JD stock isn’t inexpensive, at 34x forward estimates. But with revenue growing at 30%-plus, that valuation will look downright cheap if and when current investments pay off.
With a market capitalization roughly one-ninth that of its larger rival, even second place in the massive Chinese online shopping market should be good enough to drive JD higher.
20 Best Nasdaq-100 Stocks to Buy: Nvidia (NVDA)
It took me a while to come around to the Nvidia Corporation (NASDAQ: NVDA ) story, admittedly, but I’m now a firm believer in the company. And even with NVDA near an all-time high, after 75% gains over the past year – and stunningly, a 1,160% rise over the past three years – I’m not ready to back off just yet.
Q1 earnings last month looked spectacular , continuing a multi-year trend. Gaming growth continues to impress. Datacenter represents a real opportunity in the near-term. The automotive market could contribute down the line as self-driving cars become more of a reality.
Competition from Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. (NASDAQ: AMD ) represents a minor threat. Valuation is high, at over 30x next year’s EPS, even backing out the company’s cash. I can see the case for maybe waiting (or hoping) for a better entry point.
But NVDA hasn’t looked cheap in a while – and yet it continues to rack up the gains. This still looks like one of the best companies in the index, if not the entire market, and still a stock worth paying up for.
20 Best Nasdaq-100 Stocks to Buy: Dollar Tree (DLTR)
Dollar Tree, Inc. (NASDAQ: DLTR ) stock has been all over the place over the past year. After big gains, DLTR declined over 30% just between late January and late May. A big decline following disappointing Q1 earnings capped off the fall to a nine-month low.
But DLTR has started to recover, gaining 10% over the past two weeks and filling much of the post-earnings gap. And there should be more good news ahead. Analysts still see DLTR as a triple-digit stock, and project nearly 20% upside. The Dollar Tree banner is performing well, including a 4% same-store sales print in Q1. And a turnaround at Family Dollar continues to progress, if slower than shareholders would like.
With the stock trading at under 14x FY19 EPS estimates, there’s room for both earnings growth and multiple expansion. Forced to choose, I’d still pick rival Dollar General Corp. (NYSE: DG ), but at these levels DLTR looks too cheap as well.
20 Best Nasdaq-100 Stocks to Buy: Expedia (EXPE)
Online travel remains hot, and Expedia Group Inc (NASDAQ: EXPE ) should be a continued beneficiary. A strong Q1 report showed continued growth on the top line, setting up further improvements in earnings and cash flow going forward.
Meanwhile, EXPE looks like one of the cheaper stocks in the space.
Larger rival Booking Holdings Inc (NASDAQ: BKNG ) boasts similar growth but at a higher valuation, and with less room for upside. As such, EXPE, at just 20x forward EPS, looks like the best play on a booming sector.
20 Best Nasdaq-100 Stocks to Buy: Cognizant Technology Solutions (CTSH)
IT consultant Cognizant Technology Solutions Corp (NASDAQ: CTSH ) has had a choppy 2018. Strong fourth-quarter earnings in early February set up a nice bull run. But the stock has pulled back in part due to the disappointing guidance it gave with its Q1 report in May.
But the pullback has created an attractive entry point. So-called “digitization” — moving data online — is driving revenue and profit growth, notably in the healthcare space. Cost-cutting should help margins.
Financial services demand has been weak but there’s hope for a turnaround in that vertical.
With CTSH trading at less than 16x forward EPS, it doesn’t take much of an acceleration in growth to move the stock nicely higher. CTSH isn’t the sexiest stock in the high-tech Nasdaq, but it does look like one of the more intriguing value plays.
20 Best Nasdaq-100 Stocks to Buy: Paychex (PAYX)
A recent rally has taken some of the potential upside away from Paychex, Inc. (NASDAQ: PAYX ), but there still should be more room to run.
The payroll and HR firm looks like a forever business, dominating the market along with rival and fellow Nasdaq component Automatic Data Processing (NASDAQ: ADP ).
But from here, PAYX is the better pick of the two. It still trades ~3 turns lower than ADP on an EPS basis. ADP has gotten more press of late thanks to a large stake held by well-known investor Bill Ackman – but that alone doesn’t justify a premium to PAYX.
Meanwhile, Paychex has tons of cash and an attractive 2.9% dividend . Even at an admittedly full valuation, there’s enough to see PAYX racing past $70.
