, both down around 40% from their highs. But it’s still too early. Nobody can dodge market volatility. Throw in JPMorgan Chase but not Wells Fargo.
bounce nearly 10% so I bought more Halliburton. Forget about the concept of owning quality paper. Junk bonds get my money, not AAA corporates yielding under 3%. Leave Coca-Cola to Warren Buffett. It’s off 25%, the cola story played out in terms of per capita consumption.
The BKX Index of bank stocks was cut in half during the opening quarter this year. Our financial world is willful, capricious and overreactive to change. Make a mistake and you’ll go shirtless. Even Facebook and Alphabet which are balance-sheet powerhouses with position on the board, are no higher than a year ago. Halliburton then was much beloved, ticked at $30, not nine bucks. Citigroup
, from its yearend high lost 50% of its value. No reentry for me until I can build an income statement to believe in.
Berkshire’s huge overconcentration in financials happened over time, a great play in the value sector of the S&P 500 Index. End of March, financials comprised 35% of portfolio assets, at yearend, 40%. There was severe portfolio bruising, a $40 billion shrinkage here. Berkshire’s premium over book value declined below 20%.
When playing with ragamuffins, I keep in mind Michael Milken’s MAD ratio. This is market value of a company’s debt to its equity content. I’m comfortable with a one to one ratio, where Halliburton trades. I’m wary of companies with sizable goodwill on their balance sheets. Big write-downs happen in down cycles, what we’re experiencing all over the board.
Good stock selection won’t work magic and bail you out if sector concentration is off-base. Look what’s happened to Buffett with 35% of Berkshire’s portfolio in financials. Amazon and Netflix slot into the special-situation category as beneficiaries of the coronavirus setting. Ironically, both sell on undefinable futures. Analysts extrapolate numbers three years out to rationalize present stock prices. Forty-two like Amazon, with a couple of neutrals, one nay.
Normally, such a one-sided reading is a warning sign of overvaluation. But, at 9:30 a.m. as the animals spring from their cages, there’s Amazon, up 50 points. My mind drifted elsewhere. Was it time for great franchises like Walt Disney, victimized by the coronavirus shut down? What about American Express and JPMorgan Chase? Comeback? Comeback? Soon, but not yet.
Sosnoff and / or his managed accounts own: Amazon, Microsoft, Netflix, Wells Fargo preferreds, Halliburton, Freeport-McMoRan, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, Williams, Facebook, Alphabet and Citigroup bonds.
