CINCINNATI--( BUSINESS WIRE )-- Cintas Corporation (NASDAQ: CTAS) is now accepting nominations for its 19th annual America’s Best Restroom® contest , which shines a spotlight on deserving public restrooms. The public can submit their favorite restroom now through August 14th at www.bestrestroom.com .
“Now more than ever, people value clean, well-maintained public restrooms,” said Sean Mulcahey, Marketing Manager, Cintas. “Businesses everywhere are re-evaluating their cleaning protocols and taking precautions to limit the spread of infectious diseases such as COVID-19. In fact, almost three-quarters (70%) of Americans say they have made a conscious effort to select a specific business because it has restrooms that are cleaner and better maintained1.”
Nominations will be judged on five criteria: cleanliness, visual appeal, innovation, functionality and unique design elements. Ten finalists will be announced in September of 2020, and the public will have the opportunity to vote for their favorite finalist. The winner will receive a Cintas UltraClean® restroom cleaning service and $2,500 in facility services or restroom cleaning from Cintas while also being recognized as a first-rate public restroom.
Last year, the Nashville Zoo was crowned America’s Best Restroom for featuring two innovative exhibits. The women’s restroom in Expedition Peru's is the home to the Zoo’s family of six cotton-top tamarins, a critically endangered primate species from South America. The men’s Entry Village restroom is home to a Boelen's python.
“We were honored to be recognized by Cintas and the public as America’s Best Restroom,” said Rick Schwartz, President and CEO of the Nashville Zoo. “This award reinforces the impact restrooms have on guests. We look forward to including more “surprise” exhibits in the future.”
For contest updates, fun facts and restroom trivia, “follow” America’s Best Restroom on Twitter at twitter.com/BestRestroom and Facebook at facebook.com/bestrestroom .
For more information about the contest, please contact Christina Alvarez at calvarez@mulberrymc.com or (708) 908-0898.
Cintas Corporation helps more than one million businesses of all types and sizes get ready™ to open their doors with confidence every day by providing a wide range of products and services that enhance our customers’ image and help keep their facilities and employees clean, safe and looking their best. With products and services including uniforms, mats, mops, restroom supplies, first aid and safety products, fire extinguishers and testing, and training and compliance courses, Cintas helps customers get Ready for the Workday®. Headquartered in Cincinnati, Cintas is a publicly held Fortune 500 company traded over the Nasdaq Global Select Market under the symbol CTAS and is a component of both the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index and Nasdaq-100 Index.
