US stock futures triggered a level one circuit breaker on Monday after the US central bank announced a 100 bps rate cut and US$700 billion quantitative easing programme.
Kelvin Ong | Financial writer, Singapore | Publication date : 2020-03-16T04:25:00+0000
US stock futures reversed the market correction made last Friday 13 March, triggering circuit breakers to hit a level one 5% limit down at 7.30am on Monday 16 March (SGT).
Dow Jones 30 futures tumbled 5.4% shortly after trading started, S&P 500 futures lost 5.3%, while Nasdaq 100 futures slipped 5.5%.
US central bank slashes interest rate, launches US$700bn stimulus
These price movements happened a couple of hours after the US Federal Reserve revealed in an emergency press conference on Sunday 15 March that it would be implementing several fiscal measures to combat the economic fallout caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
These include slashing interest rates by 100 basis points to a range of 0% to 0.25%, the lowest level since 2015. This cut follows a half percentage point rate reduction already rolled out on 03 March . The previous target range was 1% to 1.25%.
In a bid to control longer-term debts and boost a slumping housing market, the US central bank also announced a US$700 billion quantitative easing programme centred on buying back and holding more assets.
The stimulus package will be divided into the purchase of US$500 billion of US treasuries and US$200 billion of mortgage-backed government securities.
US Fed chair Jerome Powell said the purchases will start on Monday with a US$40 billion instalment.
Go long or short on the Dow Jones 30, S&P 500 and Nasdaq 100 by trading CFDs via IG's market-leading platform. Start today by opening an IG account .
On the interest rate cut – the first made outside of a scheduled meeting since the 2008 global financial crisis, Powell said: ‘We will maintain the rate at this level until we’re confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals.’
The US Fed also said that it would be working with other central banks – namely the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank – to slash cash reserve requirements for thousands of commercial banks to 0, in order to boost their liquidity facilities.
US President Donald Trump said he is ‘very happy’ with the measures, and that ‘that people in the market should be very thrilled’.
Things appear contrarian at present, with US futures all down sharply post-announcement. Although overnight proceedings on the futures market rarely translate into the actual day stock trading, going ‘limit down’ after a slew of economic tools were just introduced hardly seems like a positive reaction.
According to IG Asia market analyst Pan Jingyi, the Asian market’s reaction this morning indicates that the measures are being viewed as ‘inadequate’.
The US$700 billion fiscal stimulus, while sizeable, is below the US$900 billion amount that was first reported last week . The chatter in the markets over the weekend, Pan noted, had been around ‘more substantial support’ on the fiscal front.
‘Although expectation had long been for at least a 75-basis point cut according to market watchers, the urgency displayed with this second emergency cut had perhaps made it different, spelling of the worries on hand,’ she added.
Trade the S&P 500, Dow Jones 30, Nasdaq 100 and more via IG's industry-leading trading platform. Start today by opening an IG account .
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Market volatility continues as coronavirus concerns amplify. Trade with IG Bank and take advantage of:
Tight spreads – from just 1 point on major indices, and 2.8 on US crude
Guaranteed stops – they’re free to use, and only incur a fee when triggered
