Dow climbs over 400 points, Nasdaq hits record as U.S. stocks follow surge in China markets
U.S. stocks surged near the start of Monday trade to kick off the first full week in July, with investors pegging at least part of the bullishness emanating from Wall Street to a powerful rally in China.
However, Monday’s upbeat mood in the market contrasts with a continuing spike in cases of coronavirus in the U.S.
rose 161 points, or 1.6%, to 10,370, carving out a new intraday record at 10,376.01 near the start of Monday action.
The Dow finished last week’s holiday-shortened period up 3.3%, the S&P 500 SPX,
put in a weekly gain of 4%, while the Nasdaq returned 4.6%, after closing at a record on Thursday.
The Dow is off 12.6% from its Feb. 12 record closing high, while the S&P 500 is off 7.6% from its Feb. 19 all-time closing high.
U.S. markets appeared to draw hope from a rally in China equities, despite a spike in cases of COVID-19 over the Fourth of July weekend.
Market bulls have attributed the bullish complexion for stocks to growing hope for a sharp, or V-shaped, economic recovery in the U.S. and in Asia amid fiscal and monetary stimulus.
In Asian hours Monday, Chinese shares jumped, with the flagship Shanghai Composite SHCOMP,
enjoyed a similar return, after a front-page editorial in state-owned paper, China Securities Journal , said fostering a “healthy bull market” is important, according to a translation.
The moves come as China is fending of sanctions and criticism about its decision to impose a national-security law in Hong Kong, which has drawn the rebuke of countries including the U.S. and Canada.
Against that backdrop, the U.S. added more than 49,000 new cases on Sunday, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University . Cases in the U.S. account for about a quarter of the global total of more than 11.4 million infections.
Beyond the rise in infections, the optimism reflected in equities on Monday also comes as economists at Goldman Sachs led by Jan Hatzius lowered their forecast for gross domestic growth for a contraction in 202 of 4.6%, versus a previous forecast for a 4.2% drop in economic growth. For 2021, the bank is sticking to its forecast for growth to rebound 5.8%.
The economists at the bank said they were heartened by the response of other countries to the virus as a model for what the U.S. might see in the future. “Similar economies have clearly found a more efficient way to balance reopening the economy and keeping the virus under control, and we think the U.S. is likely to eventually find its way to a better approach too,” the Goldman economists wrote.
Looking ahead, investors and traders watch the Institute for Supply Management’s nonmanufacturing index, or services report, due out at 10 a.m. Eastern.
Which stocks are in focus?
