Economic events that affect the share price of the companies that are included in the NASDAQ 100 index, or that are likely to affect the strength of the US economy, will affect the index’s price. These events should be analysed on an individual basis, because an event that is good for one company could be bad for a different company.
The strength of the US dollar will affect the NASDAQ 100’s price. For example, US companies with a large proportion of offshore sales will benefit from a weak dollar, because they’ll receive a lot of their sales revenue in foreign currencies – which could be stronger. Against a weak dollar, the foreign currency is able to buy more and the company will experience a boost in sales revenues as a result.
News releases, such as measures to combat the coronavirus, stimulus packages and central bank announcements, will affect the price of the NASDAQ 100 because companies might experience an increase or decrease in their respective share prices – depending on the nature of the news.
Earnings reports of individual companies will affect the performance of the NASDAQ 100. Strong earnings in large companies will often cause an increase, and weak reports in these companies will likely cause a drop.
The NASDAQ 100 is a capitalisation-weighted index, which means that the overall market performance of larger companies like Apple will have a larger impact on the index’s price than smaller companies
Determine your trading style: examples include scalping, day trading, swing trading and position trading. Some styles, like scalping or day trading, are better suited to the short term, while swing or position trading are better suited to the medium or long term
Study charts and price action: you can determine current market sentiment with daily and weekly price charts, while price action can help you understand previous market trends
Use technical analysis and indicators: technical analysis and trading indicators are very useful to include as part of your trading strategy, as they can help to identify certain signals and trends within the market
Look for trading signals: trading signals make it easy for you to determine whether the current trend is bullish or bearish. You can confirm current trends with momentum indicators such as the stochastic oscillator or relative strength index (RSI)
Set trading alerts: you’ll be notified once your alerts are triggered, either by email, SMS or push notification – depending on the device and platform you’re using to trade with us
Follow industry news: company and sector news will affect share prices. Keep an eye on any developing news stories or breaking news events which might cause NASDAQ 100 shares to increase or decrease in value
1 Deposits for leveraged trades are 20%-25% on 99.77% of tier one US shares.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Discover the range of markets and learn how they work - with IG Academy's online course.
