Dow Jones Today: Coronavirus Stock Market Rally Roars, Investors Ignore Covid-19 Surge; S&P 500 Stocks Build On Bullish Momentum
In fairness, to Michael, he wrote a wonderful blog article going beneath the numbers to explain how this chart can be accurate, shocking, and at the same time, perfectly normal, and acceptable.  To close the loop on this, the top five companies don’t makeup 50% of the overall index. As of this writing, they stand at about 20% of the index. That may not be the whopping 50% eye-popper, but it is still rather huge. The QQQ is even more extreme. The top five companies in the Nasdaq 100 index, the index that makes up the very popular QQQ ETF, add up to almost 50% of the Index.  Note, at this time, those are the same five companies in both indexes.
That implies that 20% of every dollar invested in an S&P 500 Index fund goes directly into Microsoft, Apple, Amazon, Facebook, and Alphabet. 50% of every dollar invested in the Nasdaq 100 ETF goes into the same five companies. It may seem crazy, however, there is a reason that cap-weighted passive index investing became, and will likely remain so popular- because, most of the time, it works!
The largest companies get large because they are doing something right. If you were to look at revenues or earnings of those top five companies, versus the aggregate revenues or earnings of the index, the numbers would be similar. The point here is that cap-weighted indexing isn’t a flaw, it is a feature. As my readers know, I have long been a proponent of non-cap-weighted indexes. An example of this would an index based on a fundamental weighting scheme such as dividend health, like the DIVCON(™) indexes, as I have written about previously .  Yet there is elegance in simplicity as well.  Cap weighting is nature at its best. If Charles Darwin were an investor, he would have all of his money in cap-weighted investments.  The makeup of an cap-weighted index is dynamic because the market drives value.  As companies grow relative to their peers, they move up in rank “earning” more of the well deserved passive index fund investment.  Of course, the opposite is true as well. When the selling starts, they move out of the top pretty quickly. In June of 2015, the top five companies in the S&P 500 were Apple, Microsoft, Exxon, Johnson & Johnson, and General Electric.  Anti-indexers would have you believe that all of the passive index dollars are propping up bad companies unnaturally, this may be true for short periods of time, but capital is stingy and it doesn’t like to be allocated inefficiently.
Eventually, markets correct themselves. The anti-index crowd would be hard-pressed to prove that index funds weren’t around just five years ago to artificially save GE on its fall from grace.  Index funds can’t permanently keep the biggest companies on top when the fundamentals deteriorate. Nature takes it’s course, and better companies rise in the ranks, leaving the “has-beens” in their wake. Sure, this could change in the future, as indexing grows in popularity but then again, people have been arguing this point for years.
The beauty of free markets is that for every buyer there is a seller. If you want to take the other side of any thesis, there is probably an ETF for that.  In fact in this case, there is a perfect ETF for that. Take a look at the RVRS ETF offered by Exponential ETFs. It is based on an index methodology that reverse cap-weights the S&P 500, allocating more to the smallest companies and less to the largest companies.  Historically, and over long periods of time, academic literature is on the side of this reverse cap-weighting strategy, but for those of you who think the cap-weighted trend is only going to continue, guess what, now there’s an ETF for that too.
There is a new kid on the ETF block, and they came up with a very clever way to play this trend towards passive index investing. Siren ETFs , a brand new ETF issuer launched a new ETF today, the ticker is SPQQ, it takes the 30 largest companies from the companies in the Nasdaq 100, and the 30 largest companies in the S&P 500, it combines them together to form a list of about 50 companies poised to benefit the most as money continues to plow into index funds.
This, “buy the best, ignore the rest” strategy would have seen significant outperformance over the past several years, and Siren’s viewpoint is that this trend is just getting warmed up. Take a look at the following chart comparing the SPQQ Index versus the S&P 500 since 2007, before the great financial crisis. NOTE, THESE ARE BACKTESTED RETURNS, THEY ARE NOT BASED ON LIVE RESULTS.
Interestingly, over that same period, the Reverse cap-weighted Index that makes up the ETF RVRS also showed strong outperformance over the S&P 500.  Perhaps the proper strategy is to invest in the top and the bottom, ignoring the middle.
However, recently, the index strategy in the SPQQ started to pull away from the pack even more.  In the chart below, the red line is the index for the Siren SPQQ ETF.
As Eric Balchunas often points out, the ETF industry is like the Terrordrome, only the fittest and the strongest survive, where the fees are marching ever closer to zero, and the regulatory costs to operate a fund business march steadily in the opposite direction. It is no place for the timid, only the strongest can survive and Siren came in with guns loaded ready for battle. Siren has chosen to price this ETF at a respectable 0.20% well below other “smart beta” strategies. So, as a fellow ETF issuer who has been duking it out in the “Terrordrome” for nearly six years, it was with a little bit of jealousy when the founder of Siren first told me about the idea.  It was one of those, “Damn, why didn’t I think of that” moments.
However, the ETF industry is funny like that, as long as you aren’t one of the “big three” issuers controlling over 80% of the assets and almost 95% of the distribution, then you are family, we “indie” ETF issuers need to watch out for one another.  So, welcome to the family Siren.  You are now part of one of the fastest-growing segments of the financial arena and we wish you the very best.
In full disclosure, to my point above, a division of my firm, the Reality Shares Index group, helped Siren to create and refine the index methodology that the SPQQ ETF is based on. However, this was their brainchild. We do not own any of the intellectual property, we just provide a small service to them for a nominal fixed fee. Beyond this fixed fee, neither, Reality Shares, Inc., nor any of its affiliates receive any compensation related to the success or failure of this fund. My justification for the article merely points it out here for investors.  I think it is a clever idea that my Forbes readers might appreciate. This disclaimer of course, does not preclude our two firms from entering into other business arrangements now or in the future.
Eric is the Co-founder and CEO of Blockforce Capital, an innovative asset management firm that offers multiple investment products in the blockchain and cryptocurrency
Eric is the Co-founder and CEO of Blockforce Capital, an innovative asset management firm that offers multiple investment products in the blockchain and cryptocurrency industry. Recently named by Frank Chaparro “as a top crypto pioneer in Business Insider’s Bitcoin Wall Street power list” (April 2018). Eric has guided the firm from being exclusively focused on dividend growth strategies to being a trailblazer and innovator in the blockchain technology investment space. Eric is a frequent blockchain commentator on CNBC, FOX Business, CNN, and The Street, and he is regularly featured as a blockchain thought leader in Barron’s, The Wall Street Journal, Forbes, and U.S. News & World Report (among other media outlets and publications). Eric has the honor to have recently been inducted as the newest member of the CFTC Virtual Currencies subcommittee for the Technology Advisory Committee(TAC).
