While some investors may have been cautious as the week began, others I fear were too optimistic after a 53-day rally from the March lows. I pointed out in January that many seemed to think that stocks only go up.
The same problems with complacent optimism were pointed out in this Bloomberg article after Thursday’s 1800-point plunge by the Dow. The authors included tweets illustrating this optimism, including one from one amateur trader claiming that he had replaced Warren Buffett, saying “I'm the captain now”. Many analysts think that panic selling from new traders may have exacerbated last Thursday’s decline.
There is also much debate on whether traders on the Robinhood platform, whose users have increased by 3 million this year, have influenced the rally from the March lows as a group. The theory is that because of reductions in the recreational opportunities during the pandemic, day-trading has become a new hobby for many. While many institutions and established traders have stayed out of the market, these new traders and their optimism have pushed the market higher. I'm unsure about this analysis,. What I do know is that the rally has certainly gone further than I and many other analysts thought was possible, and everyone is trying to figure out why.
There have been some astounding moves attributed to the Robinhood traders. For example, Fangdd Network Group (DUO), which operates as an online real estate company, was mistakenly connected to the FANG stocks by many new traders on the platform. As the hourly chart indicates, DUO closed at $9.51 on Monday and then hit a high of $129.04 on Tuesday before closing at $47.06. On Wednesday it had a high of $75.00 but then closed at $15.83.
So were there any technical changes in the market last week? After three weeks of very strong Advance/Decline numbers, there were only 416 issues advancing last week on the NYSE, while there were 2642 declining. The NYSE had a high of 12,836 which was just below the March 4 high of 13,011. That was the week before the market plunged.
The higher high this past week, alongside a decline of 6.1%, is potentially quite negative for the market in the weeks ahead. However, it would have been worse had the NYSE closed below the prior week’s low of 11,781. Still, after Thursday's precipitous decline, a 10% correction from last week's highs is looking more likely.
The lack of volume on the rally from the March lows has been a concern to me for a while, but the recent increase in volume does require more scrutiny. The NYSE A/D line made a new high the week ending June 5 but turned down last week. A drop below the support (line a) and the weighted moving average (WMA) would be negative.
The Spyder Trust (SPY) reached the resistance I identified last week at $323.95 (line a), and formed a doji the next day. The close on Wednesday was just below the doji low at $319.26, triggering a doji sell signal. On the mid-day pullback on Friday, the SPY made a new correction low at $298.30, which was below the daily starc- band, a sign that SPY was oversold. There is initial resistance now at $312.15 and then at $317.16.
The S&P 500 A/D line closed back above its WMA with Friday’s higher close. This is a positive sign, but the rally needs to continue early this week to support the bullish case. The uptrend in the A/D numbers (line b) is now important support. The volume on Thursday’s decline was the highest since March 27.
It was a rough week for all of the sectors. The Industrial Sector (XLI), Materials Sector (XLB), Financial Sector (XLF and the Energy Sector (XLE) were all down 8% or more last week. XLE was down 11.2% for the week.
After last week’s action, only three sectors are higher Year-to-Date: Technology Sector (XLK), Communication Services Select (XLC) and Consumer Discretionary Sector (XLY). Only XLK has moved above its yearly pivot R1 resistance at $103.09.
The weekly chart shows last week’s new all-time high at $104.89 and the lower close. It is now 6% above its 20-week exponential moving average (EMA) at $91.89, but 16.4% above its yearly pivot at $81.67, which is more important long-term support.
Its weekly on-balance volume (OBV) turned down last week. XLK's OBV failed to move above the high from early in the year and has formed a negative (bearish) divergence (line a). A drop below its WMA would be negative.
There is a full economic calendar next week with Retail Sales, Industrial Production, and the Homebuilders Index on Tuesday. Housing Starts come out on Wednesday, followed by jobless claims, the Philadelphia Fed Survey, and Leading Indicators on Thursday.
For those that believe that the economy is on a smooth return to normal, no action is needed. However, I personally am skeptical that the economic recovery will be smooth or easy. Therefore I will continue to close out some investing positions to raise cash for better buying opportunities.
I will be watching the action early in the week, especially the market internals, for signs of whether the correction will continue. I frequently update my analysis on Twitter . Another lower weekly close will be a sign that the market is in trouble.
In my Viper ETF Report and the Viper Hot Stocks Report , I update subscribers with market analysis twice per week, along with specific buy and sell advice. Each report is just $34.95 per month. New subscribers also receive six free trading lessons.
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks,
I began analyzing the financial markets in 1982 when I became the research director for a financial advisory firm and provided regular market analysis on stocks, commodities, currencies and mutual funds. I am a technical analyst. Much of my focus was on how obscure technical indicators or methods, could be applied to the financial markets and used as an effective trading tool. Many of the indicators I have used for years, such as Gerry Appell's MACD and Welles Wilder's RSI, have subsequently gained wide popularity. This page is devoted to sharing my insights and techniques in order to help you become a smarter trader/investor. Over the past twenty years I have traveled around the world several times, visiting all of the major financial centers as he taught professional traders and money managers my approach to the financial markets.  My method of stock selection starts with a proprietary scanning method to select a group of individual stocks for more extensive analysis. This includes an in-depth study of the volume patterns that I use to determine the strength of a stock's trend. Those with the strongest trend, either up or down, are then further analyzed to determine entry, exit and risk levels. I use Fibonacci retracement, projection and extension analysis to determine both profit objectives as well as stops.
