Tech stocks and others gained last week in part due to initial signs the coronavirus pandemic may have reached its peak. The New York Times reported last week that “investors seized on signals” of improving newsflow, especially in the most impacted regions that dominated headlines during the recent crash.
Taking a look at some of the headlines over the weekend reveals incremental coronavirus-related improvements, especially in two of the more notable epicentres: New York and Italy.
Data from New York state on Sunday showed the lowest number of net new hospitalisations since March 16, at just 53. For reference, the peak looks to have been established on April 2 at 1,427. Italy reported on Sunday 431 new deaths – a tragedy by any and every measure, but the lowest count seen in more than three weeks.
If anything, the “light at the end of the tunnel” that some started to highlight last week has become a bit more bright. There is renewed hope that the American economy can restart perhaps sooner than previously expected.
Naturally, this bodes well for tech stocks, particularly the ones that dominate the Nasdaq 100 Index, like Apple . The sooner the American public can go back to work and earn a full salary, the sooner they will be confident enough in their job security and be willing to spend a good amount of money when the new 2020 iPhone is available for sale.
Tech season starts next week with multiple big banks, health-insurance company UnitedHealth Group , transportation leader J.B. Hunt Transport Services , and Dow component Johnson & Johnson all on deck to report results. Tech giants aren’t scheduled to report earnings in the coming week, but tech investors will certainly be paying close attention to how other sectors are performing.
Few if any investors are expecting to see strong positive earnings growth as has been the norm over the years past few years. In fact, data from FactSet points to a 9 per cent year-on-year drop in earnings for all of 2020 while some major research firms like BofA Global Research expect a massive 29 per cent plunge in earnings per share (EPS) this year.
But data from FactSet when broken down by sector bodes particularly well for the tech industry. First-quarter EPS growth for the technology sector was revised down from 4.13 per cent at the end of 2019 to 0.62 per cent.
In other words, tech stocks are expected to show minimal growth, compared to Energy, Consumer Discretionary, Industrials, Financials, Materials, and Consumer Staples which are all expected to show negative or zero growth in earnings.
Granted, expectations for tech stocks to escape earnings season with minor growth could be revised if the first rounds of earnings disappoint. In this case, investors can expect the Nasdaq 100 Index forecast next week to plunge. As the data and information continue to come in, outer-week forecasts and expectations will need to be revised – either upwards or downwards.
The Nasdaq 100 performance will in part be dictated by the first set of earnings releases. Tech investors will have a head start in terms of knowing what to expect and could have more time to readjust their positions accordingly.
Here is a summary of when the top-15 largest tech companies within the Nasdaq 100 Index are reporting (or expected to report) earnings.
Nasdaq 100 forecast next week: tread carefully
The Nasdaq index is trading near a one-month high and bulls are in complete control ahead of earnings season. But despite clear signs of near-term momentum, investors should be reminded all of the recent gains can be wiped out in just one trading session. Such was the case on March 16, 2020, when the Nasdaq 100 Index collapsed 970 points or more than 12 per cent.
As such, Nasdaq 100 investors should think twice before going big and buying in large amounts. A reasonable and sensible strategy would consist of treading carefully in the current environment. Buying small amounts of stocks at current levels with the intention of adding more over time is sensible and responsible.
It may also be sensible and wise for investors that timed the market perfectly to consider taking some profit off the table in the coming week. While a Nasdaq 100 analysis of the near-term outlook over the next five days looks favourable, much can change in sentiment in such a short period of time. Buyer beware. . .
