Big Tech has taken a tumble.
The QQQ Nasdaq 100 ETF , which includes tech heavyweights Apple and Microsoft , fell 2% on Wednesday as coronavirus cases spiked in U.S. hot spots.
Mark Tepper , president of Strategic Wealth Partners, is not worried the broad tech rally is coming to an end. He told CNBC's " Trading Nation " on Wednesday he continues to bet on growth areas in tech, such as "cloud, AI, data optimization, advanced chips."
However, while tech takes a breather, he is backing one little-discussed cloud stock that could continue higher.
"It's Cloudera . It's got maybe a $3-$4 billion market cap so it doesn't get talked about a lot, but it's got a lot going for it. We started our position about a year ago at around $6 right before Carl Icahn came, and now it's around $12," said Tepper.
Activist investor Icahn is Cloudera's largest shareholder at nearly 18%. Cloudera offers cloud-based data analytics and engineering to enterprise clients.
"The company is also a buyout candidate. If you think about a company like IBM , they already work with Cloudera. IBM's biggest issue is they don't know how to innovate, they can't create anything so they acquire, and at a $3 or $4 billion market cap, this would be a drop in the bucket for them," said Tepper.
Mark Newton , founder of Newton Advisors, is more concerned that the tech rally could be grinding to a halt.
"The QQQs seem to hit new highs every day, but when you strip out the Big Five [Apple, Amazon , Microsoft, Alphabet and Facebook ] it certainly is a much different picture," Newton said during the same segment. "Take a look at the Nasdaq 100 equal weighted index versus just the Nasdaq. That certainly has not followed it back up to new all-time high territory."
The market-weighted Nasdaq 100 is up 15% this year, while the equal-weighted Nasdaq 100 has risen 6%.
"Looking at the equal weighted technology index by Invesco, RYT , versus the SPY [which follows to S&P 500], you do see a pretty pronounced break just in the last couple weeks of a trend that's been existing for the last two months," said Newton. "You're starting to see a breakdown. … I do expect to see tech and the market lower over the next couple of weeks before this market can proceed higher."
