You can see that the sudden mid-February gap down in price has now been completely filled just a few months later. That early February peak just below 9700 would seem to be the likely target for this dramatic rally. That’s where sellers showed up as pandemic worries began to hit global markets.
Consider how these recent positive days are creating a divergence with a different key index.
The volatility index daily chart looks like this:
Usually this index tracks inversely to the NASDAQ-100 and most other stock index charts. That is, when stocks head up, volatility tracks downward. The VIX has tracked sideways, not down, since May 11th even as the big tech names kept going higher. The last 4 days have shown a significant negative divergence. This, as the NASDAQ-100 comes within striking distance of the February price peak.
To get a better feel at the difference between this NASDAQ-100 hot streak and other markets, take a look at 2 indices not even close to keeping up.
The Energy Select Sector SPDR Fund looks like this:
This is the ETF that contains all of the major oil stocks. It’s recovered off of the huge mid-March dip, but look how far it has to go to meet up with that February high or the January peak. Compared to the NASDAQ-100 rally, the energy group is what you would have to call subdued.
The Financials Select Sector SPDR Fund looks like this:
This is the exchange traded fund that contains the big bank stocks. Similar to the energy group, you can see how it’s managed to rally off of the March sell-off, but the recovery is downright weak compared to the NASDAQ-100. The financials have quite a distance to travel to make it back to the February highs.
It’s another way of saying how money has been flowing powerfully into a few select hot tech stocks and staying out of traditionally respected energy and bank names. It’s similar to a situation where one end of the boat is heavily loaded and the other end is light.
That — combined with the divergence in NASDAQ-100 price to the direction of the volatility index — might be reason to begin to think cautiously.
I do not hold positions in these investments. No recommendations are made one way or the other.  If you're an investor, you'd want to look much deeper into each of these situations. You can lose money trading or investing in stocks and other instruments. Always do your own independent research, due diligence and seek professional advice from a licensed investment advisor.
