Global economic uncertainty surrounding Brexit and political instability in the US have fuelled an economic slowdown. The US Federal Reserve has moved to curb economic slowdown and it is a widely held belief that technology companies will perform more robustly than the economy overall.
This belief coupled with the fact that large capitalisation corporations have outperformed smaller companies in recent memory makes the NDX a safer alternative to other indices. The key word being safer as there is no one expecting the gains seen in the beginning of 2019 in the near future.
The Nasdaq 100 Index (NDX) comprises 103 securities from the top 100 domestic and international non-financial companies listed on the Nasdaq stock exchange. It is a capitalisation-weighted index and its components are weighted according to the total market value of outstanding shares. It is considered a benchmark of the technology sector listed on the Nasdaq exchange and a premier large market capitalisation growth index.
The Nasdaq stock exchange was officially opened on February 8, 1971 and was the world’s first fully electronic stock exchange. During the late 1990s and 2000s the Nasdaq attracted the majority of new technology stock listings and became the second largest stock exchange in the world behind the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in total market capitalisation.
The Nasdaq 100 stock index was created in 1985 as an alternative large-cap benchmark index to the S&P indices. It comprises global market leaders in non-financial industries related to technology, telecommunications, retail and biotechnology.
LAM Research is at the top of Nasdaq 100 market movers in 2019 and has a market capitalisation above $38bn and +98 per cent YTD stock price growth. LAM research was founded in 1980 and specialises in the design, manufacturing and sales of semiconductor processing equipment used in the production of microchip technology. In its most recent reporting cycle LRCX outpaced the majority of analysts’ expectations by posting earnings of $3.18 per share.
As the second fastest of NasdAQ 100 market movers in 2019 KLA Corporation (KLAC) has a market capitalisation above $26bn and +89 per cent YTD stock price growth. Formed in 1997, KLAC is a capital equipment company specialised in semiconductor manufacturing equipment and yield management systems. KLAC global operations in manufacturing, R&D and support are located in the US, Europe, Israel, Japan and throughout the Asia/Pacific region. KLAC stock has gained 4.19 per cent in the past month, outpacing the computer and technology sector gains of 2.38 per cent.
