How does Saturday and Sunday trading work?
Saturday and Sunday trading works differently depending on the market.
Our Saturday and Sunday GBP/USD market is separate to its weekday equivalent. This means you can speculate on market developments over the weekend without having to alter an existing weekday position. Weekend cable (GBP/USD) is distinguished from the weekday market by its name on the platform – ‘Weekend GBP/USD’.
Trading hours on weekend GBP/USD are from 8am on Saturday to 8.40pm on Sunday (UK time). Any positions open at 8.40pm (UK time) on a Sunday will roll over into weekday positions when the weekday GBP/USD market resumes 20 minutes later at 9pm.
As with GBP/USD, your weekday index positions will be separate to their weekend counterparts. This means you can speculate on market developments over the weekend without having to alter your weekday positions. Weekend index markets are differentiated from their weekday counterparts by their names. Our Saturday and Sunday FTSE 100 market is called ‘Weekend FTSE 100’, for example, whereas the weekday equivalent is simply ‘FTSE 100’.
Weekend trading hours on indices are from 8am on Saturday to 10.40pm on Sunday (UK time). Positions open at 10.40pm (UK time) on a Sunday will roll over into weekday positions when those markets resume 20 minutes later at 11pm. Please note, however, that the FTSE 100 and Germany 30 will open for trading two minutes later at 11.02pm (UK time).
Trading cryptocurrencies on a Saturday and Sunday works a little differently because the underlying market is already open over the weekend. As a result, any position you open is on our underlying cryptocurrency market. If you already have a position open with us, any stops or limits can be triggered over the weekend – we recommend monitoring your positions as usual. Cryptocurrency trading is available from 8am on Saturday through to 10pm on Friday
Who offers weekend trading in the UK?
IG is the only UK provider to offer weekend trading on indices and GBP/USD. We also offer weekend trading on our Crypto 10 Index , giving you exposure to ten popular cryptocurrencies from one position, as well as our full range of regular cryptocurrency markets.
Does the FTSE trade on Saturday and Sunday?
You can trade the FTSE 100 on a Saturday and Sunday with IG – the only UK provider to offer this market on the weekend. IG clients also have access to a number of other exclusive indices including Wall Street , Germany 30 and HS50 .
