Do you believe the stock market is volatile? And does it scare you? If yes, I’d urge you to follow the prices of cryptocurrencies, including Bitcoin. An internet search would bring up stomach-churning price charts that really are scary!
That’s why I think average retail investors who plan long-term for comfortable retirements will be better off investing in stable FTSE 100 or FTSE 250 companies, rather that buying into Bitcoin for an adrenaline rush.
Every time I look at at a Bitcoin price chart, I immediately notice continuous peaks and troughs as well as choppiness. In other words, soon after it looks like it’s ready to make new highs, the price plummets.
For example, in 2017, the price soared from under $1,000 to nearly $20,000. But it then fell below $7,000. By November 2018, it was below $4,000. Then in June 2019, Bitcoin was over $10,000.
But in early January 2020, Bitcoin was back around $7,000. As broader stock markets began falling in February, Bitcoin hovered around $9,000. By mid-March, it dropped to the $5,000 level.
As global stock indices and individual share prices began recovering from their multi-year lows at the end of March, the Bitcoin price also began an ascent. On 8 May, it was shy of $10,000. But on 13 May, as I write, it is hovering around $8,780.
Amid such wild price swings, the debate over the value and the future of many cryptocurrencies rumbles on. But clearly, investing the hard-earned cash (that you want to grow for retirement years) in Bitcoin is not for everyone.
But there’s a way to have the best of both worlds through buying blockchain-relevant shares. Cryptocurrencies are based on blockchain technology, which can be described as a digital ledger, acting like a spreadsheet. In the future, blockchain applications are likely to have an increased impact on agriculture, asset management, insurance, healthcare, retail, and supply chain management, to name a few areas.
Therefore for retail investors, companies that work with blockchain technology may be appropriate businesses to do due diligence on. Their shares may potentially be worthy additions to long-term portfolios.
For example, the Energy Web Foundation is working with energy giants, including BP, Centrica, and Royal Dutch Shell, to explore how blockchain technology can be used in the energy sector.
Several big pharma companies, such as AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline, have been collaborating to promote and cut the cost of drug discovery through increased use of blockchains.
Some global banks, including HSBC Holdings, Lloyds and Santander, are researching the potential use of blockchain-based banking solutions.
Grocery stores and food manufacturers, such as Sainsbury’s and Unilever, are exploring how blockchain could help them keep track of food in the supply chain.
Put another way, I expect to hear the word ‘blockchain’ more often in the near future. And I expect many FTSE 100 and FTSE 250 companies to embrace this new technology.
My Motley Fool colleagues regularly cover FTSE shares and funds that you could consider adding to a diversified retirement portfolio. They point out that the despite various downturns and even crashes, over the long run, stock markets in the UK return about 6% to 8% annually, on average.
Research also shows that investors who purchase dividend-growth stocks and reinvest the dividends to buy more shares are likely to see considerable growth in their savings.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
tezcang has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK owns shares of and has recommended GlaxoSmithKline and Unilever. The Motley Fool UK has recommended HSBC Holdings and Lloyds Banking Group. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
