"Today’s guidance will help clarify which crypto-asset activities fall inside our regulatory perimeter," Woolard added, with the FCA warning : "Consumers should be cautious when investing in such crypto-assets and should ensure they understand and can bear the risks involved with assets that have no intrinsic value."
The FCA branding bitcoin and cryptocurrencies as without "intrinsic value" is likely to rile many bitcoin believers who have long argued blockchain technology, which underpins bitcoin and most other cryptocurrencies, gives the digital tokens value.
"It is technically true that cryptocurrencies have no ‘intrinsic value’ when compared to share ownership in actual companies, however there are many examples where a marketplace bestows value on an intangible asset," Jon Ostler, of comparison site Finder.com, told the U.K.'s Telegraph newspaper. "For example, the brand of ‘bitcoin’ itself has value and although its future place in society is still unclear, it is one of the most likely coins to stay the course."
The warning from the U.K. comes shortly after U.S. president Donald Trump unleashed a scathing attack on bitcoin and cryptocurrencies , comments that were then echoed by other senior officials in his administration , including Treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin who branded bitcoin and cryptocurrencies a "national security issue."
It's thought that Trump's attacks on bitcoin and crypto were in direct response to Facebook's libra cryptocurrency project, which, if successful, could undermine the international dominance of the U.S. dollar.
The bitcoin price climbed to around $13,000 per bitcoin earlier this year but has since fallen back, ... [+] with the price still far from the near-$20,000 per bitcoin it reached in late 2017.
Meanwhile, the watchdog warned investing in what it called "unregulated crypto-assets" will not be covered by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme, which pays out if the investment collapses.
"It remains possible in the future that if an unregulated token is subject to common acceptance and usage in the U.K. then either the FCA or the Bank of England will reconsider this position in order to ensure that adequate consumer protection exists," said Tim Dolan, partner at law firm Reed Smith.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
