According to the plans, the U.S. Federal Reserve would offer bank accounts to all Americans, branded FedAccounts.
The FedAccounts would allow the government to bypass commercial banks and turn retail banking into a public service—everyone would have a FedAccount just as they have a social security number that they could use to send and receive dollars.
It's unclear whether a new digital dollar would use bitcoin's blockchain technology or a traditional, centralized database.
Though the new digital dollar plans were ultimately cut from the bill before it was put to the the House vote, its brief inclusion rekindled a conversation about mainstream digital currency that was started by social media giant Facebook last year when it began work on its libra cryptocurrency project— something that caused the bitcoin price to more than double in under six months .
Last year, the bitcoin price was pulled out of a deep bear market by rumours some of the world's biggest technology companies, from iPhone-maker Apple to social media giant Facebook, were poised to jump into the cryptocurrency game.
Facebook moved first, revealing its plans for stablecoin libra and attracting a wave fresh criticism of the company that was still trying to repair its reputation following a string of privacy and data-sharing scandals.
The regulatory backlash against Facebook last summer almost derailed its libra plans and discouraged other technology or finance companies from trying anything similar, putting the bitcoin price back on a steep downward trend— with bitcoin interest and adoption struggling .
"[A digital dollar] would be a first step towards crypto technologies being widely adopted," executive director of Washington-based lobby group the Blockchain Association, Kristin Smith, told bitcoin and crypto news site Coindesk .
The bitcoin price has struggled to climb along with traditional markets this week after taking a big ... [+] step down earlier in the month--though bitcoin bulls remain confident the bitcoin price will climb in the medium to long term.
Other senior bitcoin and crypto industry figures are unconvinced a new digital dollar will be a positive development for bitcoin adoption, however.
"[A digital dollar] would be ... fascinating and a good move in the direction of leading the U.S.," chief executive of BinanceUS, Catherine Coley, told crypto new site Cointelegraph , adding: "In terms of how that actually affects the adoption rate or the financial inclusion that we see as benefiting from digital assets, it's a little bit different."
Meanwhile, the massive coronavirus-induced stimulus that propelled the digital dollar to the forefront of policy maker minds is itself pushing people toward bitcoin and other scare digital assets—with the bitcoin and cryptocurrency community convinced the "largest rescue package in American history" will mean a surge in bitcoin and crypto interest.
Some think the historic emergency rescue packages being readied by the Fed and other central banks around the world will still not be enough to support markets and the economy in the face of a prolonged pandemic-preventing shut down.
Meanwhile, after the digital dollar plans were scrapped from the coronavirus stimulus bill, a similar proposal cropped up in a draft Senate banking bill unrelated to the coronavirus pandemic—suggesting this conversation is far from over.
With a new digital dollar now on the table and confidence in Fed about to take a hit, bitcoin has a lot to gain.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
