Among the top ten biggest cryptocurrencies by value, bitcoin SV, an offshoot of bitcoin cash, which is itself an offshoot of the original bitcoin, has recorded the sharpest rise so far this year, rising 209%.
The claim has been widely ridiculed by the bitcoin and cryptocurrency community and Wright has so far failed to backup his claims.
"While prices appear to be increasing and substantial growth is happening in terms of institutional product offerings and regulatory clarity, there are still significant unknowns hovering over the market at large," researchers at bitcoin and crypto trading platform SFOX said this week , leaving their market outlook at "neutral."
Bitcoin remains the prime cryptocurrency market mover, however, with its dominance, a measure of bitcoin's value compared to the wider crypto market, at 64.2%—up from just over 50% in February 2019.
"It’s not clear whether bitcoin will function as a safe haven in coming geopolitical turmoil; it’s not clear how much institutional appetite is actually there for all the institutional crypto offerings being launched; and it’s not clear what impact the upcoming bitcoin block reward halving, just four months away, will have on the price of bitcoin," SFOX analysts added.
All other top ten cryptocurrencies, excluding stablecoin tether, have also risen even further than bitcoin so far this year.
The second most valuable cryptocurrency, ethereum, is up 60%, while the third, Ripple's XRP, is up 47%.
Ripple's chief executive Brad Garlinghouse marked XRP's year-to-date performance, tweeting his annoyance at former billionaire hedge fund manager-turned-bitcoin and crypto investor Mike Novogratz's suggestion XRP will have another lackluster year in 2020, asking for a "factcheck."
Ripple's XRP lost 46% of its value last year.
Despite bitcoin's recent rally, the price has a long way to go to reach last year's high of around ... [+] $14,000 per bitcoin.
Elsewhere, litecoin, known as the silver to bitcoin's gold, is up 78%, with ethereum-rival EOS adding 77% so far in 2020.
Rounding out the top ten, binance coin, cardano, and tezos are up 43%, 87%, and 62% respectively.
Further down the rankings, top 20 cryptocurrency dash, which has found a niche as a payments alternative in South America, has climbed 195%.
Stellar, up 56%, tron, up 53%, monero, up 77%, chainlink, 61%, iota, up 113%, and neo, up 50%, have also all outperformed bitcoin this year.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
