Much above $11,000 and BTC will look very exciting indeed.
Now something interesting struck me this morning that I hadn’t recognized. Inflation is the same in the U.S., Europe and the U.K: U.S. 1.9%; EU 1.93%; U.K. 1.94%.
That’s a lightbulb moment for me because it shows that this block is synced up in monetary policy at the hip. This has all sorts of consequences I’ll have to noodle on for weeks and many investing implications and opportunities, but the interesting thing for bitcoin is after the halvening the BTC inflation rate will be: 1.83%
This should mean on its own, that bitcoin’s value should rise in terms of a basket of these currencies as its inflation will be below theirs and provide a hedge and carry. This is only marginal but it won’t take much of a rise in inflation to start to make a significant widening. There are many forces driving asset price inflation but the best returns are to be had on assets that are in finite supply. Bitcoin has a finite supply and the consequent upward price pressure is gong to be enhanced by new supply being less than inflation and significantly less than real global growth of 3%.
From Forbes: Stay informed and ahead of the crowd with Forbes Crypto Confidential, a free weekly e-letter delivered to your inbox. Sign up today.
Clem Chambers is the CEO of private investors website ADVFN.com and author of 101 Ways to Pick Stock Market Winners and Trading Cryptocurrencies: A Beginner’s Guide . He won Journalist of the Year in the Business Market Commentary category in the State Street U.K. Institutional Press Awards in 2018.
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I wrote a stock column for WIRED – which described me as a ‘Market Maven’ - and am a regular columnist for numerous financial publications around the world. I have written for titles including:  Working Money, Active Trader, SFO and Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities in the US and have written for pretty much every UK national newspaper.  In the last few years I have become a financial thriller writer and have just had my first non-fiction title published: 101 ways to pick stock market winners. Find me here on US Amazon.
You’ll also see me regularly on CNBC, CNN, SKY, Business News Network and the BBC giving my take on the markets.
