Bitcoin Suddenly Goes Into Meltdown—Sending Ethereum, Ripple’s XRP, Bitcoin Cash And Litecoin Into Free Fall
The bitcoin price has almost given up its 2020 gains.
The cause of the sudden sell-off wasn't immediately clear, though some have pointed to wider stock market and commodity turmoil in the face of the spreading coronavirus.
On Sunday evening, bitcoin was seen trading as low as $7,684 per bitcoin on the Luxembourg-based Bitstamp exchange.
On Saturday, bitcoin had looked poised for a rally, climbing as high as $9,192 before beginning it's steady plunge.
Meanwhile, oil prices crashed by 30% yesterday after Opec members, led by Saudi Arabia and Russia, failed to agree on deeper production cuts to offset weaker demand caused by the coronavirus outbreak, effectively sparking a price war.
Major U.S. index futures, including the S&P 500, the Dow, and the Nasdaq, all plunged around 5% following the oil cartel's decision.
The latest fall in the bitcoin price will all but destroy any remaining expectation that bitcoin has begun acting as a so-called safe-haven asset, which are expected to move higher in times of greater risk and uncertainty.
"Bitcoin is down 8% in the last day, much more than global equities," economist and outspoken bitcoin critic, Nouriel Roubini, said last night via Twitter .
"Another proof that bitcoin is not a good hedge versus risky assets in risk-off episodes. It actually falls more than risky assets during risk-off."
Some bitcoin and cryptocurrency watchers tried to downplay the crypto market meltdown, urging bitcoin investors to take a long-term view.
The bitcoin price had looked on the verge of a recovery before going into meltdown over the weekend. ... [+]
"For those who have long term investment horizons, bitcoin is absolutely a buy during these dips," Jehan Chu, co-founder of blockchain startup investor Kenetic Capital, told CNBC .
"We can expect more of this volatility sparked by macro health and financial shocks, but ultimately long term investments in the digital future, and it's key asset bitcoin, will be a winning strategy."
