The bitcoin price is up 25% over the past 12 months and bitcoin has now recovered all its ... [+] coronavirus crash losses.
Meanwhile, bitcoin miners are nervously eyeing the bitcoin price—and hoping it holds.
"At this price level, miners using rigs from 2016-18 will not be profitable," said Rich Rosenblum, co-head of trading at crypto market maker GSR.
"They’ll start to stream out of the market, lowering bitcoin’s hash rate. It’s likely that more bitcoin will be sold by miners to help finance new machines. Additionally, the production of new machines has been slowed by the pandemic and its impact on the supply chain. Depending on how long prices stick around this range, we may not see this level of mining activity recover until next year."
Bitcoin's hash rate, a measure of the computing power being directed at the bitcoin network, climbed to a fresh all-time high ahead of the halving as miners tried to squeeze as many bitcoin from the network as possible before the supply cut .
If too many miners begin selling freshly minted bitcoin to pay for their operations, they could flood the market.
"If the price of bitcoin goes down, it will likely force weaker miners to wind down their operations," said Jerry Chan, chief executive of TAAL, a publicly traded crypto mining company focused on bitcoin offshoot bitcoin SV.
"They are selling the bitcoin in their treasury to pay off their financial commitments to the hashing farms for hosting and electricity. That constant liquidation is flooding the market to the downside, making it harder for other miners to continue to operate at a break even or profitable manner."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
