Given the controlled rate of block production, the block subsidy halves every 4 years or so. The total number of bitcoin that will be produced is less than 21 million, if the current code runs unchanged. At 36 halvings, the subsidy will be less than 1 Satoshi, which is 1/100 millionth of a Bitcoin. 1 Satoshi is worth 1 ten-thousands of a cent at current bitcoin prices. Anything less than 1 Satoshi is worthless in bitcoin. The halving will continue after 140 years, but will yield no block subsidies. Even if one Bitcoin is worth $100 million, 1 Satoshi will only be worth $1.
This is not the only payment to the miners who do all the work to hold bitcoin together. Every block consists of multiple transactions. Every transaction can contain multiple inputs and outputs. The sum of bitcoin in the output transactions has to be lower or equal to the sum of transactions in the input transactions for the transaction to be valid. If it is lower, the excess bitcoin in the transaction compensates miners for including the transaction in the block. This is called a transaction fee. All the transaction fees in a block also goes to the miner who builds the block. This is the other incentive for the miners.
As the block subsidy reduces in value, the miners have to make money from transaction fees, if they are to secure the bitcoin ecosystem with proof of work. This creates upward pressure on transaction fees.
Like Elvis, Satoshi was spotted last month, when 40 Bitcoin mined the first year, moved. This caused panic in the markets, as Satoshi’s presumed hoard is around 1 million bitcoin. A prospect of so much supply suddenly entering the market caused the prices to dip momentarily.
The upward price pressure is predicated on scarcity. In addition to the programmed turning off of the money supply; there is another source of scarcity. These are the bitcoin that are effectively immobilized due to the loss of private keys, either directly or indirectly, due to the death or disappearance of their owners who have effectively taken these bitcoin out of circulation. This attrition is sure to continue; as long as bitcoin lasts. The trove of bitcoin that has not moved in a long time is more than 10% of the eventual supply. This percentage will inevitably increase as time passes.
For a moment, Lightning and other layer 2 protocols was seen as a way to make a micro-payment system on top of bitcoin. However, there are many crypto-economic and other factors seem to stand in the way of increased adoption of Lightning. Halving, transaction rates, immobilized bitcoin, pool mining, all of these take bitcoin further away from a true peer to peer system into the hands of a few.
I am the founder of dlt.nyc. My work as a technology consultant is backed by years as a developer and manager in capital markets, building solutions. Experiencing the
I am the founder of dlt.nyc. My work as a technology consultant is backed by years as a developer and manager in capital markets, building solutions. Experiencing the dysfunction in Financial Markets Infrastructure first-hand, I was drawn to the blockchain. I was at the table when DAH, R3 and EEA were formed. I am also a community leader in Hyperledger. I helped create a project in Hyperledger labs to explore standards and CBDC called eThaler. I am a firm believer in open-source technology and its many strengths. I have coded in many languages, used many different databases and network solutions. I write lyric poetry and crypto-economic analyses. I hold a holistic view of the digital transformation underway in the financial markets and the economy. I want to explore these transformative times with my readers.
