Twitter's chief executive Jack Dorsey has previously declared his love of bitcoin but is trying to ... [+] give adoption a boost.
"For bitcoin to become a widely used global currency—one that can’t be stopped, tampered with, or rigged in anyone’s favor—improvements to bitcoin’s [user experience], security, privacy, and scaling are required," Square's cryptocurrency division wrote in a blog post this week.
Square Crypto, which was created last year by Dorsey to spearhead bitcoin and cryptocurrency development at the company, has said it's building a development kit for bitcoin's Lightning network, a way for smaller bitcoin payments to be sent more quickly and cheaply without clogging up the bitcoin blockchain.
"Because we are a consolidated team of open-source developers, we are in a strong position to coordinate on major projects that individuals may not have the time or resources to tackle," Square Crypto added.
Bitcoin's Lightning network has been praised by some as the potential saviour of bitcoin transactions—something that will allow the clunky and encumbered original blockchain-based cryptocurrency to compete with the likes of more nimble dash, litecoin, and Ripple's XRP.
The bitcoin price has climbed over the last year but remains far from its all-time high of almost ... [+] $20,000 per bitcoin.
Research carried out by bitcoin and cryptocurrency exchange Bitmex this month found that development of bitcoin's Lightning network "is still for hobbyists and technologists," but revealed usage was ahead of expectations.
Meanwhile, Dorsey's Square last week was awarded a U.S. patent for a network that enables crypto-to-fiat transactions in real-time.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
