The FTSE 100’s steady recovery continues to impress. But it pales in comparison with the stonking price gains Bitcoin has recorded since hitting March’s lows.
The virtual currency’s soared 110% in value in the three-and-a-bit months since then. By comparison, the Footsie’s daily gains have been limited to modest single-digit-percentage rises at best. Still, I’d much rather invest my hard-earned money in cheap FTSE 100 shares than in Bitcoin.
It’s no mystery why Bitcoin attracts so much print yardage today. We all love a ‘get-rich-quick’ story, and the idea of reaching our long-term investment goals years and years ahead of schedule is terrifically appealing.
However, Bitcoin’s rampant price gains of recent weeks illustrate exactly why the cryptocurrency is such a dangerous investment. Extreme price movements often follows no obvious pattern, whether viewed from either a technical or fundamental perspective.
The difference between making big returns or losing vast amounts of your cash is as unpredictable as the outcome of flipping a coin.
Like all get-rich-quick schemes, Bitcoin represents no little danger to investors. It really is the ultimate ‘Marmite’ investment, with debate raging on whether it is the asset to own in an increasingly digitalised world, or whether it’s worth no more than fresh air.
Investment guru Jim Rogers chimed in on the issue again in recent days. He commented that “cryptocurrencies didn’t even exist a few years ago, but in the blink of an eye they became 100 and 1,000 times more valuable. This is a clear bubble and I don’t know the right price. Virtual currency is not an investment target. It’s just gambling.”
I’m not saying that fans of Bitcoin will be proved wrong over the long term. But at this stage it’s impossible to quantify the true value of cryptocurrencies like this. Rogers incidentally predicts that Bitcoin “will go to zero” eventually.
This is why I would much rather continue investing my money in stocks than Bitcoin. When you buy a share you can lay claim to something tangible, from a share of the profits they generate to the chairs its workers sit down on and the coffee in their mugs.
Investing in FTSE 100 shares remain an attractive idea right now too. As I said at the top of the piece, Britain’s blue-chip index has risen steadily rather than spectacularly. But any gains are quite impressive given the state of market-sensitive news flow.
For example, the FTSE 100’s near-1% rise on Tuesday comes despite fears of a US-China trade deal collapse and another spike in new Covid-19 cases in Germany. This suggests to me there still remains plenty of blue-chip shares too attractive to miss at current prices.
My own research shows there are a galaxy of great value stocks to choose from right now, whether you’re hunting stocks for growth or for those paying big dividends .
So I say forget about Bitcoin and go bargain hunting on the Footsie.
It contains details of a UK-listed company our Motley Fool UK analysts are extremely enthusiastic about.
They think it’s offering an incredible opportunity to grow your wealth over the long term – at its current price – regardless of what happens in the wider market.
Because they believe it’s working both with the market… And against it.
Click here to get access to our presentation, and learn how to get the name of this 'double agent'!
Royston Wild has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
