This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Bitcoin Just Suffered Its Worst Drop in 20 Months. Here’s Why.
Bitcoin plunged as much as 18% on Tuesday, its largest intraday drop since January 2018. The digital currency fell as low as $7,944, before bouncing back to $8,500 later on Tuesday afternoon, according to CoinDesk.
It ought to be a happier time for investors in the digital currency, which just got a big vote of confidence from one of the most important players on Wall Street. A new Bitcoin futures product was launched this week by a company called Bakkt, which was developed by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE), owner of the New York Stock Exchange. The Bakkt futures product settles in actual Bitcoins, unlike a similar product from CME Group (CME), which settles in dollars. Garrick Hileman, head of research at Blockchain.com, called it “an important development in the maturation and legitimization of cryptoasset markets.”
The Bakkt product is meant for institutional investors who may have been wary of trading and hedging Bitcoin exposure on less-regulated exchanges. But some Bitcoin investors and analysts said that early volume has been noticeably light for the Bakkt product, and that the underwhelming start has hurt the price.
“The catalyst for today’s plunge, in my mind, seems to be the underwhelming launch of Bakkt. This is a prime example of “buy the rumor, sell the news,” wrote Mati Greenspan, senior market analyst at crypto trading platform eToro.
Others also cited the low volume as well as a technical change in the trading pattern, and a decline in an important attribute of Bitcoin—the “hash rate” that indicates how much computing power is working to track Bitcoin transactions.
“Bitcoin’s recent price drop is a result of technical and fundamental factors, including a breakdown of the consolidation range, Bakkt’s tame launch of futures, and a sudden network hash rate drop,” wrote Joe DiPasquale, CEO of Bitbull Capital.
“The disappointing Bakkt opening signals to the crypto community that institutions are less ready to invest in BTC at scale than was supposed, which means the price was probably too high and due for a correction,” wrote Alex Mashinsky, CEO at Celsius Network, a crypto lending and depository company. “What we’ve just seen is short sellers and momentum traders piling on to make things worse, and now here we are back at support.”
Others also noted that Bitcoin was ripe for a drop—because of technical factors and the launch.
“I see two things—on the technicals, we were heading into a wedge formation that was going to break out one way or another,” wrote Alex Gordon-Brander, the CEO of crypto dark-pool provider Omega One, in an email to Barron’s. “And on the fundamentals, the limp Bakkt launch has a ‘sell the news’ quality to it...a lot of people were waiting for that as a sign that the institutions were finally here...”
Blockchain.com’s Hileman argued that slow early volume shouldn’t be taken as a sign on Bakkt’s longer-term viability. “It is important not to rush to any kind of quick judgment based on launch day trading activity.”
Bitcoin Just Suffered Its Worst Drop in 20 Months. Here’s Why.
Bitcoin plunged as much as 18% on Tuesday, its largest intraday drop since January 2018.
