The price action of mid-2019 might be a foggy memory amid the frantic volatility of financial markets right now. However, back then plenty of commentators were piling in to proclaim that the asset’s time as a creditable safe-haven asset had come.
There was some logic to this thinking, too. Bitcoin sailed to within a whisker of $12,000 in June as a myriad of geopolitical and macroeconomic worries weighed on market mindset. Trade wars between the US and China were worsening. Brexit fears were intensifying, and economic data from the eurozone was becoming increasingly worrisome. Meanwhile, central banks the world over were cutting interest rates to help rescue the slowing global economy.
There was even some talk that cryptocurrencies would topple gold as the most popular flight-to-safety asset. In a world that is becoming increasingly digitalised this school of thought in theory had at least a little merit.
What today’s falls show, then, is that such thinking was clearly built on very sandy foundations.
Indeed, compare Bitcoin’s crash in beginning-of-week business to the performance of gold. Yellow metal prices are within touching distance of setting new seven-year peaks around $1,700 per ounce.
One thing is for sure. Saying that digital currencies are already as valuable as eternal rush-to-safety assets like gold is, well, baloney. It’s clear that investors are only interested in safe havens with long track record behind them (the yield on 10-year US Treasuries hit record lows of 0.318% overnight as buyers piled in).
So forget about buying Bitcoin, I say. I’ve long voiced my worries over the legitimacy and thus the long-term outlook for the cryptocurrencies. We are still waiting for the Federal Reserve to sign off on a crypto-backed exchange-traded fund (ETF), after all. The volatility of recent sessions has done nothing but make me even more cautious.
I’d much rather buy into ETF backed by gold instead, say the Aberdeen Standard Physical Swiss Gold Shares ETF. Alternatively, purchasing a similar vehicle containing shares in gold-producing stocks (like the iShares Gold Producers UCITS ETF) is another strong option.
My personal preference would be to buy shares in one or more of London’s quoted gold miners. These stocks aren’t immune to Monday’s selloff and major producers like Polymetal International and Centamin were down (albeit marginally) in today’s trading. However, once the worst of the investor panic is over I reckon such companies are in great shape to record spectacular share price gains.
I am a seasoned freelance financial journalist reporting for a variety of publications across the globe. I was formerly a stocks and commodities reporter - and editor of
I am a seasoned freelance financial journalist reporting for a variety of publications across the globe. I was formerly a stocks and commodities reporter - and editor of print and online foreign currency coverage - at Shares Magazine, providing information and analysis for readers to make sound investment decisions in the UK and overseas. I was also a regular contributor to the magazine's extensive catalogue of bookazines and trading guides. Prior to this I was a reporter with the BaseMetals.com and TheBullionDesk.com newswires, breaking the latest news and providing in-depth analyses of the base and precious metals markets.
