NDAQ's legacy business can drive upside, while blockchain can amplify it
By Matt McCall and the InvestorPlace Research Staff , Editor, MoneyWire Jul 1, 2020, 9:55 am EDT
There’s a simple and attractive case for Nasdaq (NASDAQ: NDAQ ) at the moment. The legacy exchange business supports what is still a reasonable valuation for Nasdaq stock. Meanwhile, blockchain and cryptocurrency initiatives support further longer-term upside.
Admittedly, to some investors, blockchain and even cryptocurrency might seem to be a bit of a disappointment. Blockchain adoption has been slower than hoped. Bitcoin trades at less than half past peaks. Some altcoins have completely crashed.
But from a long-term perspective, both trends remain intact. Blockchain growth will continue. Meanwhile, cryptocurrencies aren’t fantasy money. Rather, they are the software of the future.
Indeed, other major trends saw volatility in the beginning. The ‘dot-com bubble’ in the late 1990’s burst — but stocks like Amazon.com (NASDAQ: AMZN ) and eBay (NASDAQ: EBAY ) still made fortunes for early investors. More recently, cannabis stocks have struggled, but the long-term potential in that industry can’t be denied.
Major trends take time. For blockchain and cryptocurrency, it’s a matter of when, not if. And what makes Nasdaq stock attractive is that the exchange business means investors don’t have to worry too much about the when.
As I write this, NDAQ stock trades at an even 21x next year’s consensus earnings per share estimate of $5.69. That’s a multiple I’d be happy to pay just for the exchange business.
After all, this is a truly wonderful business. Savvy long-term investors look for a competitive moat — and Nasdaq clearly has a deep one. Obviously, the New York Stock Exchange, owned by Intercontinental Exchange (NYSE: ICE ), is a key rival. But the business is a duopoly, with no real third competitor.
And Nasdaq is heaviest in tech, which is where this market’s growth is and should be going forward. The NYSE has won a few major initial public offerings in the sector, with Uber (NYSE: UBER ) likely the best example. But high-tech, high-growth companies continue to choose Nasdaq.
In fact, Nasdaq is leading the NYSE so far in 2020 in terms of capital raised.
Growth has been impressive in recent years, and that should continue. Almost one-third of revenue comes from what the company calls “information services,” including market data. Trading volumes, which had dipped before the coronavirus pandemic, account for only 36% of sales.
This is a business that simply should keep growing for years, if not decades, to come. Economic cycles can have a modest impact by reducing the number of IPOs, but overall Nasdaq’s business will remain resilient.
21x earnings for a defensive, growing business in this market is a more than reasonable multiple. Just looking at what Nasdaq stock is right now, the price seems right.
