China's plans for an East Asia cryptocurrency scheme that could rival bitcoin, Facebook's libra, and ... [+] even the U.S. dollar, were revealed at the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference this month.
China's rapid expansion of its digital currency program has led to urgent calls for the U.S. to speed up development of a digital dollar.
However, regulator intervention in Facebook's planned libra digital currency means it could eventually function effectively as a digital dollar equivalent.
Facebook's Libra Association, a group organized by the social media giant to manage the digital currency, unveiled revised plans in April that will see it issue separate coins backed by individual fiat currencies such as the dollar and euro.
Meanwhile, highlighting the challenge Donald Trump and the U.S. Federal Reserve faces, some currency analysts have begun to question whether the dollar will be able to maintain its position as the world's dominant reserve currency.
"In the face of Washington’s poorly timed wish for financial decoupling from China, who will fund the saving deficit of a nation that has finally lost its exorbitant privilege," asked Stephen Roach, a faculty member at Yale University and former chairman of Morgan Stanley Asia, in a Bloomberg op-ed.
"Like Covid-19 and racial turmoil, the fall of the almighty dollar will cast global economic leadership of a saving-short U.S. economy in a very harsh light."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
