In December 2017, CME and the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) launched their respective cash-settled bitcoin futures trading products as one of the first major moves to bring a bitcoin-based (or, in this case, a bitcoin price-based) trading product to the mainstream financial world. At the tail end of a difficult bitcoin bear market in March 2019, however, CoinDesk reported that CBOE would discontinue its bitcoin futures trading activities. CME, on the other hand, pressed onward with its bitcoin futures trading.
From January to March 2019, bitcoin floundered between $3,400 and $4,200, according to TradingView.com's Coinbase bitcoin price chart . On April 2, price shot from $4,200 up past $5,000 in a strong single-day price move. By the end of May, crypto's largest asset found itself above the $9,000 mark. In June, bitcoin spiked to nearly $13,900 in price, and has since found itself somewhat range-bound between $13,200 and $9,000.
"This is an exciting time for bitcoin futures, as well as for cryptocurrency assets in general," McCourt said.
"There is a lot of broad investor interest in cryptocurrency, as well as growing interest in a variety of applications for cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology. It will be interesting to see how this new market continues to grow and scale. For us at CME Group, a major focus is education, and making sure our customers have all the tools they need to make solid strategic decisions around crypto."
In May 2019, CME tallied its most successful month of bitcoin futures trading since the product's inception in 2017, "trading an average of more than 13,600 contracts each day, equal to ~$515 million in notional value or 68K equivalent bitcoins," McCourt explained. "On May 13, BTC traded a record single-day volume of 33,677 contracts (168K equivalent bitcoin or $1.3B notional)," he added.
As bitcoin's slump throughout 2018 and part of 2019 took its toll on the market, CME never contemplated discontinuing its bitcoin futures trading products, McCourt said. "It’s important to remember that CME Group is a neutral marketplace," he explained. "Our role is to help bitcoin market participants manage their risk, regardless of whether the underlying price goes up or down," he said. "We’re pleased with the growth of CME Group bitcoin futures so far."
Regarding the upcoming days, McCourt did not provide any specifics on CME's plans, or lack thereof, for any potential additional bitcoin trading products.
"We’re constantly talking to our clients and market users about new products and solutions that will help them to manage their price risk. We launched bitcoin futures in 2017 in response to client demand, and any decision to launch new crypto products will similarly be driven by customer feedback."
Disclaimer: I actively trade cryptocurrencies, as well as hold a small amount of BTC, ETH, LTC, XMR, NEO, ZEC, BEAM, BCH and various insignificant other altcoin positions.
I am a full-time writer in the cryptocurrency space. My writing experience includes writing for Crypto Insider, CCN, and CryptoPotato on news and other important
I am a full-time writer in the cryptocurrency space. My writing experience includes writing for Crypto Insider, CCN, and CryptoPotato on news and other important concepts. I am also a part-time crypto trader and find trading fascinating. I know my way around price charts, indicators, hardware wallets, and almost any notable exchange. Additionally, I have a podcast (Crypto: Secrets of the Trade) where I interview successful traders in the space regarding their stories and methods. I hold a small amount of BTC, BCH, ETH, LTC, XMR, ZEC and NEO, as well as various insignificant altcoin positions. I also hold stock positions in CBOE, AU, AUY, MUX, CFWFF and TOLWF. Connect with me on Twitter (@BenjaminPirus).
