came onto the scene in 1998, data from the WorldHistoryProject showed.
Eisma mentioned a similar potential situation around crypto assets. “The ‘irrationally exuberant’ 2017 speculative coin bubble was followed by the painful, necessary cleansing of the ecosystem in 2018,” Eisma said.
Riding the fad and hype of blockchain and cryptocurrencies in 2017, many startups looked to apply the technology wherever they could, regardless of feasibility.
“Many projects that had no true utility, no use case or need for a token (why do you need a token?), no need for a distributed database (why do you need a blockchain?), no product, and no realistic build out, deserved and needed to go to zero,” Eisma explained.
How does bitcoin play into the mix? “The recent halving event gave us a reminder of the original value proposition of bitcoin,” Eisma said referring to when bitcoin’s mining reward cut in half on May 11, 2020 , as a scheduled part of its code. The halving essentially decreased the amount of fresh bitcoin entering the market through mining.
The final block prior to the halving, as well as bitcoin’s first mined block in 2009, showed inscribed messages on the state of the U.S. economy. “We are reminded that bitcoin is a non-government controlled, decentralized, programmable, disinflationary digital asset that could potentially serve as a store of value, medium of exchange, and unit of account for a digital present and future,” Eisma noted.
“These characteristics are valuable and timely given the current global macro environment and pandemic,” he said.
“Over time, we'll understand that we are at the dawn of an evolution of a technological, digital monetary system where bitcoin will potentially serve as the base of a Bretton-Woods-like global digital standard.”
Disclaimer: I actively trade cryptocurrencies, as well as hold a small amount of BTC, ETH, LTC, XMR, NEO, ZEC, BEAM, BCH, DASH, LINK, XTZ and various insignificant other altcoin positions.
I am a full-time writer in the cryptocurrency space. My writing experience includes writing for Crypto Insider, CCN, and CryptoPotato on news and other important
I am a full-time writer in the cryptocurrency space. My writing experience includes writing for Crypto Insider, CCN, and CryptoPotato on news and other important concepts. I am also a part-time crypto trader and find trading fascinating. I know my way around price charts, indicators, hardware wallets, and almost any notable exchange. Additionally, I have a podcast (Crypto: Secrets of the Trade) where I interview successful traders in the space regarding their stories and methods. I hold a small amount of BTC, BCH, ETH, LTC, XMR, ZEC and NEO, as well as various insignificant altcoin positions. I also hold stock positions in CBOE, AU, AUY, MUX, CFWFF and TOLWF. Connect with me on Twitter (@BenjaminPirus).
