The bitcoin price has rallied hard since a coronavirus-induced crash in March, with many in the ... [+] bitcoin and cryptocurrency community predicting bitcoin could soon return to its all-time highs of around $20,000 per bitcoin.
The world has used both the Dutch guilder and the British pound as reserve currencies through the 18th and 19th centuries, respectively, before adopting the almighty U.S. dollar in the 20th century.
Bitcoin, created during the 2008 financial crisis by a mysterious person (or persons) going by the name Satoshi Nakamoto , has been adopted by the cryptocurrency community as an antidote to such government-controlled fiat currencies.
Unlike money created by central banks and backed by governments, there will only ever be 21 million bitcoin—making it the world's first truly scarce digital asset and, according to many bitcoin supporters, meaning bitcoin will increase in value as demand rises.
"My head is going to explode, Jesus Christ," Burr remarked an hour into the podcast, admitting he doesn't have extensive knowledge of finance or politics.
"I’m calling it now. On July 1, 2020, Bill Burr and Bert Kreischer kicked off a historic 18-month Bitcoin bull market," Pompilano joked on Twitter following the podcast, with the bitcoin and cryptocurrency community praising Pompilano's simple explanations.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
