The bitcoin price has fallen by some $2,000 since the survey was carried out, hit hard by the broader market sell-off sparked by the spreading coronavirus.
The U.S. Federal Reserve and central banks around the world have moved to pump unprecedented levels of freshly-printed cash into the system in response to the coronavirus crisis, with some senior bitcoin and cryptocurrency figures arguing this could result in a surge of interest in crypto .
"As we get used to talk about trillions, a modest $2 trillion market cap of bitcoin will put one bitcoin at $100,000," the chief executive of the world's largest bitcoin and crypto exchange Binanace, Changpeng Zhao, said via Twitter , adding it's "not such a hard to imagine number now, right?"
Ahead of the bitcoin price plunge earlier this month, many of Kraken's biggest users expected the ... [+] bitcoin price to hit all-time highs later this year.
However, the outlook for altcoins was less rosy with only slight more than half (54%) of respondents expecting a so-called alt season this year.
Traders didn't see ethereum, the world's second most valuable cryptocurrency returning to its all-time highs this year, with an average price target of $810—down from ethereum's all-time highs of over $1,000 in late 2017.
Elsewhere, bitcoin and crypto market sentiment was mixed. A majority (44%) of respondents saw the market as bullish, though 34% were undecided and 22% felt it was in bear market territory.
Bitcoin and crypto traders also failed to find common ground as to what will push the market forward this year.
"Adoption" was cited by 19% of respondents, while bitcoin’s upcoming halving was named by 15%. Political "conflict," "fear of missing out," and economic "crisis" were also popular responses.
Most bitcoin and cryptocurrency investors believe we're now in a bull market though there's little ... [+] agreement, with many seeing the current market as bearish and others undecided.
The survey, carried out in late January, polled some 400 so-called VIP Kraken users, with 41% of respondents describing themselves as "investors," 40% as "traders," and 15% as "institutions"—the remainder was made up of "payment processors," "crypto exchanges" and "miners."
Meanwhile, nearly 50% of respondents said they expect the U.S. Security and Exchange Commission (SEC) to approve a bitcoin exchange-traded (ETF) fund this year.
The SEC has rejected many applications for a bitcoin ETF over recent years, meaning this latest ruling didn't come as a surprise, though comments accompanying the ruling suggested the SEC might not green light a bitcoin ETF for the foreseeable future .
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
