For example, on June 18, 2020, let’s say Jennet bought a futures contract which granted her the right to buy one bitcoin (BTC) at $10,000 on June 30, 2020. Then on June 30th, the price of 1 BTC is $20,000. In this case, Jennet’s cash settled futures profit would be $10,000 ($20,000 – $10,000).
Note: if the futures was to be physically settled instead, the counterparty to Jennet’s contract would have to send her 1 BTC on June 30th. Then Jennet could do whatever she wants with the bitcoin, including  immediately selling it at the current market price and profit $10,000. Physically settled crypto futures are very rare at the moment.
Cryptocurrency exchanges facilitate the whole process described above and charge a fee for creating a meeting place for buyers and sellers.
The majority of the cryptocurrency futures products offered in the market right now are considered to be unregulated because they are not governed by a regulator like Commodities and Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). Unregulated contracts do not get any favorable tax treatment and work similar to buying/selling regular cryptocurrencies. If you make a profit by selling an unregulated crypto futures contract after holding it for 12 months or less, it is taxed as short-term capital gains. If you make a profit after holding a position for more than 12 months, it results in a long-term capital gain ( lower tax rate ).
Regulated Futures Contracts have a more favorable tax treatment under IRS Code §1256. When you trade regulated contracts, 60% of the profits are taxed as long-term capital gains and 40% of the gains are taxed as short-term capital gains, irrespective of how long you keep the position open. Essentially, trading regulated contracts allows you to convert 60% of your profits into long-term gains and get taxed at a much lower rate than short-term gains. Note that this is highly beneficial for day traders.
Continuing with the example above, Jennet could save 24% more in taxes by trading regulated contracts compared to unregulated contracts (assuming Jennet’s ordinary income tax rate and long-term capital gain tax rates are 25% and 15%, respectively):
Tax savings between regulated crypto futures Vs. unregulated crypto futures
Keep in mind that if you are trading cryptocurrency futures and generating tax savings, you will want to ensure that you are tracking these transactions in a reputable cryptocurrency tax software that keeps track of futures trades.
Disclaimer: this post is informational only and is not intended as tax or investment advice. For tax or investment advice, please consult a professional.
Shehan is the Head of Tax Strategy at CoinTracker.io ( bitcoin & crypto tax software ). He is one of the handful of CPAs in the country who is recognized as a real-world operator and a conceptual subject matter expert on cryptocurrency taxation.
He is a CPE instructor who has been awarded with various awards: 2019 CPA Practice Advisor 40 under 40 accounting professionals , Outstanding Young CPA of the year & Among 21 accountants mentioned on Accounting Today who will be helping shape (and reshape) accounting in 2020 and beyond by Accounting Today
Shehan is a renowned speaker who has done speaking engagements with many organizations including Google, Coinbase, Lyft, AICPA, American Bar Association, and State CPA Societies.
