However, as seen by today’s price action, the correlation between the S&P 500 and bitcoin has been rising steadily as Covid-19 cases spike in several states. The popular bitcoin analyst, PlanB, has stated recently that equity correlation is driving bitcoin, not scammers. He further notes that “I think it is a silly narrative. In the old days if traditional markets moved without news or cause, it was always "the hedge funds.”
Finally, others surmise bitcoin is a free market asset and naturally oscillates, which make correlations unstable and temporary over time. Popular crypto trader, Scott Melker, notes “I do think that bitcoin has benefited from a bull market (equities) - that's just logical...but that does not mean that those assets have been correlated.” He further states that if you have to make a comparison, “I think a naked eye on the DXY (US Dollar Index) vs BTC chart is more compelling...clear inverse correlation.”
While each faction believes their conclusions are the leading driver of bitcoin’s tepid movement, no one knows for certain given the unverified price effect of scammer sales, and inconsistent correlations between both equities and US dollar index to bitcoin.
Pragmatism would suggest that some combination of the aforementioned elements are driving bitcoin. However, only after time has passed and looking in hindsight, will readers know the dominant factor.
Disclosure: The author owns bitcoin and ethereum.
Chris is the Founder of Valiendero Digital Assets, a leading quantitative cryptocurrency hedge fund leveraging machine learning and data-driven strategies to make
Chris is the Founder of Valiendero Digital Assets, a leading quantitative cryptocurrency hedge fund leveraging machine learning and data-driven strategies to make probabilistic investments over a variety of liquid digital assets. He received his graduate degree from Carnegie Mellon University's Tepper School of Business where he concentrated in analytics. He has authored numerous articles and long-form research reports for leading blockchain media outlets like Forbes, CoinDesk, and Brave New Coin, which have been distributed globally. Chris chats about digital assets, blockchain projects, and their market structures from a data-first perspective as to provide useful insights rooted in data rather than opinion.
