The coronavirus outbreak has sent shockwaves through the world’s economy and this has caused politicians and central bankers to react in various ways. However, global market leaders, Wall Street CEOs and hedge fund managers had one of the best years in more than a decade since the 2008 financial crisis. In fact, evidence shows that the bureaucracy and the modern banking cartel knew a crash was on the horizon, as the covid-19 crisis was simply the pin that popped the balloon.
American Fascists Knew the Bubble Would Pop – Stocks Were Massively Overvalued, Bonds Manipulated
Toward the end of 2019 market players and Wall Street’s top CEOs discussed whether or not the U.S. was facing a recession in 2020. This was after the stock market, S&P 500, and Dow Jones Industrial Average broke records last year. A few months before the coronavirus started spreading wildly, central banks like the Federal Reserve were already slashing rates and funneling billions into the hands of private banks. It’s almost as if the elite knew the bubble would pop in 2020, as bonds were manipulated by banks and stocks were massively overvalued. In fact, a majority of bankers predicted that 2020 would suffer from a really bad recession that could be worse than the last economic fallout. Central banks started easing up on monetary policy and created vast amounts of stimulus throughout the months of August, September, and October of last year.
The Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell told the press in October that the Fed would be buying Treasuries in mass quantities but he said that it was “not quantitive easing (QE).” Well before the covid-19 event, the Fed slashed the benchmark interest rate three times and funneled billions of USD into the hands of private institutions.
When 2020 started, the smoke signals were everywhere, as hedge fund managers and strategists warned that the stock market was extremely overvalued. On January 14, financial experts reported on how the stock market has never been this big relative to the economy. “Such elevated valuations in past periods have weighed on equity returns over the subsequent five years and lowered the odds of positive outcomes,” Goldman Sachs strategist Sharmin Mossavar-Rahmani noted in the company’s 2020 outlook. “That the bulk of last year’s returns came from higher valuations, and not growth in earnings, only compounds investors’ concerns,” Mossavar-Rahmani added. Despite, the warnings of a massive stock market bubble, a few Wall Street execs continued to shill company shares that many people had deemed “overpriced.”
Wall Street and financial institutions had the best year in 2019 when the S&P jumped 30% and the Dow rose more than 22% last year as both indexes smashed records. Apple and Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) were the biggest stocks in 2019 and many market strategists voiced that these stocks were extremely overvalued.
Additionally, analysts also cautioned retail investors about how far apart Wall Street trading and the real world economy really is compared to the hyped up news headlines. Markets today are made up of algorithms, futures, options, high-frequency trading, and passive funds and there’s whopping $532 trillion in global derivatives markets. Most of the time stock market derivatives are not even traded by real people, as estimates note that 75% of all trades are computer-driven.
Moreover, derivatives like futures and options are usually not dealing with the physical goods themselves and they are simply trading pieces of paper that represent corn, oil, gold, and other commodities. The reason the derivatives markets could be frightening is due to the large separation from real-world goods. Megabanks and financial institutions did not learn from their prior mistakes and many of them are highly leveraged with derivatives products today. This means when real-world prices crash, highly leveraged institutions suffer major losses when spot prices are extremely turbulent like they were in 2008.
The biggest recipients of Federal Reserve Bailout Funds from 2007 to 2011 are the same financial institutions that got bailouts months before the covid-19 outbreak. These banks are also getting trillions of U.S. dollars because of the coronavirus event, as politicians have given Wall Street massive stimulus injections and slush funds in the last two weeks.
For centuries now, a number of people have been aware that the politicians and central banks have manipulated and ruined global economies. The U.S. is a perfect example of how the American bureaucracy and Wall Street moguls from the ‘House of Morgan’ destroyed the nation’s economy by introducing a fraudulent Ponzi system . History shows that the banker families in the early 1900s are the very same banking families who run the country’s finances today. The fraudulent banking cartel is likely the direct cause of all of the economic destruction modern Americans have seen in the last three decades.
The Money Trust’s leading members JP Morgan (left) and JD Rockefeller (right). The same banking families who were responsible for the market crashes during the early 1900s through the ’30s run today’s megabanks and American corporations.
The Wall Street crashes in 1907, 1929 and in the early ‘30s, all stemmed from the greed and fraudulent activities invoked by the House of Morgan, otherwise known as the ‘Money Trust.’ Members of the Money Trust included the families of JP Morgan, JD Rockefeller and a small group of finance moguls. Morgan’s empire consisted of U.S. Steel, General Electric, International Mercantile Marine, International Harvester, AT&T, and approximately 21 railroads. Interestingly, during the Great Depression years, a slew of politicians and financiers stepped down months before the crash and many large firms restructured.
January 2020 Saw the Most CEO Resignations in the U.S. – 219 Corporate Leaders Abruptly Step Down
The 2020 crash which started on March 12, otherwise known as ‘Black Thursday,’ was a surprise for most Americans watching the stock market that day. However, today’s Wall Streeters, hedge fund managers, politicians, and bankers didn’t seem surprised by the bubble bursting at all. In fact, one could assume that the banking cartel and the American bureaucracy knew exactly when the crash was coming. One of the biggest signs of the elite knowing the crisis was imminent was how Q4 2019 had the most CEOs step down in years as 1,300 top executives left in November 2019.
CEOs from mega-companies and financial institutions stepped down in record numbers again in December 2019. The public also witnessed the same trend in January and February, as January 2020 set a record for the most CEO departures in America recorded in a 30-day time span. 219 major chief execs unexpectedly left their positions with little to no warnings. Even though some of these CEOs ran these companies for decades, they stepped down abruptly. Disney’s CEO Bob Iger stepped down , Adam Bierman from Medmen suddenly up and left , and Mandy Ginsberg of Tinder and Match Group stepped away from her firm’s as well. The list of noteworthy CEOs who stepped down is quite exhaustive, but includes people like Hulu’s Randy Freer, Mastercard’s Ajay Banga, IBM’s Ginni Rometty, Tmobile’s John Legere, Harley Davidson’s Matt Levatich, Linkedin’s Jeff Weiner, Microsoft’s Bill Gates, Salesforce’s Keith Block, Lbrand’s (Victoria’s Secret, Bath & Body Works, Pink) Leslie Wexner, and many more well known chief executives.
The protectors of today’s corporatists and monopolies, otherwise known as U.S. politicians, were also scrutinized for knowing about the economic impact in advance. Senator Kelly Loeffler (R-GA) was accused of sharing insider information and she dumped millions in shares after the Senate’s coronavirus briefing took place.
Senator Kelly Loeffler (R-GA) was accused of dumping millions of shares before politicians had a private briefing with President Donald Trump. A slew of other American bureaucrats are accused of the same thing.
Loeffler wasn’t the only bureaucrat accused of dumping on the stock markets before ‘Black Thursday,’ as U.S. representatives like North Carolina’s Richard Burr, California’s Dianne Feinstein , and Oklahoma’s James Inhofe all sold stocks before the Senate’s classified briefing on January 24. None of these politicians or corporatists warned the general public of a looming stock market crash.
Cryptocurrency advocates have been warning about the monetary manipulation for well over a decade and many bitcoiners predicted these events. The money system has been fraudulent for a very long time and digital currencies like bitcoin could transform the world’s monetary system for the better. Reading this article should tell you that there is no free market within the United States and the capitalism that exists is really cronyism mixed with manipulative profits.
Bitcoin.com has numerous resources available for anyone to get started learning about and using cryptocurrencies like BCH , BTC , and ETH . Our comprehensive website has a local peer-to-peer marketplace , an exchange , a fantastic gaming platform , a mining pool, cloud contracts and so much more. Check out our guides, resources, and services today.
Concepts like cryptocurrencies and free markets are becoming more enticing to people every single day. The reason for this trend is largely because central bankers and politicians are making it blatantly obvious that they are screwing society. The elite knowing about the mid-March stock market fallout well beforehand should be no surprise to those who understand the collusion between the state and central banks. More than ever, activists and free market advocates wholeheartedly believe that the desire to separate money from the state is a goal worth fighting for. Especially since we have solid proof of fraudulent behavior from our so-called representatives and banking institutions.
What do you think about politicians and the elite knowing about the crash well before covid-19? Let us know what you think in the comments below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not a direct offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation or endorsement of any products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
