The fear index hit an all-time high in late June as excitement around Facebook's plans for its bitcoin rival reached fever pitch but has since dived as regulators signal their dissatisfaction with the social media giant.
"The current regulatory roadblock on Facebook’s plans for its digital token has dimmed down investor sentiment for cryptocurrencies," said Christel Quek, chief commercial officer at Bolt Global, a cryptocurrency wallet provider and entertainment company.
The fear index is currently showing a reading of 20, but earlier this week dropped as low as 11 after falling sharply throughout August.
Since the index hit its year-to-date lows, the bitcoin price has fallen a further 2%, while the overall cryptocurrency market has seen more than $30 billion wiped from it over the last week.
Meanwhile, the bitcoin price dropped below the psychological $10,000 per bitcoin mark this week, further worrying traders and investors.
Some in the bitcoin and cryptocurrency industry pointed out the wider cryptocurrency market has declined along with the bitcoin price.
"Bitcoin and major cryptocurrencies including litecoin, ethereum and Ripple's XRP have declined [this week], weighed down by concerns of a slowing economy," Quek added.
The crypto fear index hasn't been this low since bitcoin was trading just over $3,000 per bitcoin.
The fear index, created by website and software comparison company Alternative.me, calculates the index's value daily on a scale of 0 to 100 using volatility, market volume, social media, survey, dominance, and trends. Zero means "extreme fear," while 100 means "extreme greed."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
