Buying FTSE 100 dividend shares may seem to be a risky move at present. After all, many companies may decide to reduce their dividends in light of difficult operating conditions.
However, low interest rates may mean demand for dividend shares increases significantly over the medium term. Improved dividend growth may also take place among many large-cap shares as their operating environments improve.
As such, purchasing a selection of dividend shares now could be a better means of generating high returns than buying other assets, such as Bitcoin.
Demand among income-seeking investors for FTSE 100 dividend shares could increase over the coming years. The Bank of England recently said it would be likely to unwind its quantitative easing programme before considering interest rate rises. This could prolong a period of historic low interest rates. And, with the future prospects for the economy remaining uncertain, negative interest rates aren’t currently being ruled out by policymakers.
The end result may be that there’s less choice for income investors. Cash ISAs and bonds may, for example, fail to offer positive returns after inflation is factored in. This may cause demand for dividend shares to rise, since they could offer significantly greater income returns than other assets. Especially because their yields are now higher in many cases following the index’s market crash.
Rising demand for FTSE 100 dividend shares could mean their prices rise. Since there are now fewer companies in the index paying dividends, due to uncertain operating conditions, they could become increasingly attractive for investors who are seeking to generate high total returns in the coming years.
Although FTSE 100 dividends have been cut in many cases in recent months, they’re likely to return over the coming years. The world economy’s track record of recovery from recessions is very strong. Meanwhile, policy action has generally been swift in response to lockdown measures put in place due to coronavirus.
Therefore, dividend growth could prove to be much stronger over the coming years than stock valuations currently suggest. As such, investors may be able to access attractive yields today, and obtain an inflation-beating growth rate in their income over the long term.
Since a large proportion of the index’s past total returns have been derived from the reinvestment of dividends, this could lead to a surprisingly large portfolio valuation.
With FTSE 100 dividend shares continuing to be relatively unpopular, and Bitcoin having doubled since its March low, some investors may consider purchasing the virtual currency instead of income stocks. However, Bitcoin’s lack of fundamentals, regulatory risks, and a lack of a long-term track record mean that purchasing dividend shares in an ISA while they’re relatively cheap could entail a more favourable risk/reward ratio for long-term investors.
A top income share that boasts a reliably defensive business model… plus a current forecast dividend yield of 4.2% to boot!
With global markets in turmoil as the coronavirus pandemic tightens its grip, turning to shares to generate income isn’t as simple as it used to be…
As the realities of ‘life under lockdown’ begin to bite, many of the stock market’s ‘go-to’ high-yielding companies have either taken an axe to their dividend pay-outs… or worse, opted to suspended them altogether – for the near-term at least.
With so many blue-chip and mid-cap companies scrambling to hoard cash right now, where are we income investors to turn for decent yields?
Our analyst has unearthed what he believes could be a very attractive option for income- seeking investors – a company that, in his view, boasts a ‘reliably defensive’ business model, combined with a current forecast dividend yield of 4.2% to boot!*
This business even has form in riding out this kind of situation, too… having previously increased sales and profits back in 2008 and 2009 when the world was gripped in the deepest economic crisis since the Great Depression.
*Please be aware that dividends are variable and not guaranteed.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Income Share… free of charge!
Peter Stephens has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
