The stock market’s recent crash may lead some investors to consider purchasing other assets such as gold and Bitcoin. After all, the outlook for the world economy is highly uncertain. This may lead to lower earnings for many companies that could produce disappointing stock price returns in the near term.
However, the recovery potential of the stock market means that now could be the right time to buy a diverse range of businesses while they offer wide margins of safety . They could outperform gold and Bitcoin, both of which may face uncertain long-term outlooks.
The price of gold may have risen to a seven-year high in 2020, but its scope to deliver further gains may be limited by an improving economic outlook over the long run. Investor sentiment towards the precious metal has improved due in part to its defensive appeal at a time when the economic outlook is uncertain.
However, the prospect of improving GDP growth may cause investors to gradually switch their attention to riskier assets over the coming years. This may reduce demand for defensive assets such as gold.
Likewise, the future for Bitcoin could be less positive than many investors are currently anticipating. The virtual currency faces regulatory uncertainty that could limit its capacity to replace traditional currencies.
Furthermore, its limited size and the threat posed by other virtual currencies may mean that investor sentiment towards Bitcoin fails to strengthen. Due to its price being dependent on sentiment rather than fundamentals, this could lead to a disappointing performance from the cryptocurrency.
In the near term, the prospects for the stock market could prove to be highly challenging. News regarding coronavirus may mean that other assets, such as gold, continue to outperform global equities in the coming months.
However, over the long run, the stock market appears to have strong recovery potential. It has a solid track record of recovering from even its very worst downturns. For example, indexes such as the FTSE 100 and S&P 500 halved during the global financial crisis. They went on to not only recover from their downturns, but to also post new record highs in the bull market in the years following the global recession.
Although a similar outcome may seem unlikely at the present time, now could be an opportunity to buy high-quality stocks while they offer wide margins of safety. This may enable investors to obtain favourable risk/reward ratios that ultimately lead to higher returns in the long run as the world economy gradually recovers.
This process may take time, which is why a long-term view is likely to be crucial for any investor purchasing stocks at the present time. But by building a diverse portfolio of stocks, you could generate higher returns than investing in other assets such as gold and Bitcoin over the coming years.
Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all fired up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the pandemic!).
But its capital-light, highly scalable business model has previously helped it deliver consistently high sales, astounding near-70% margins, and rising shareholder returns … in fact, in 2019 it returned a whopping £150m+ to shareholders in dividends and buybacks!
While COVID-19 may have thrown the company a curveball, management have acted swiftly to ensure this business is as well placed as it can be to ride out the current period of uncertainty… in fact, our analyst believes it should come roaring back to life, just as soon as normal economic activity resumes.
That’s why we think now could be the perfect time for you to start building your own stake in this exceptional business – especially given the shares look to be trading on a fairly undemanding valuation for the year to March 2021.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Growth Share… free of charge!
Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
