At around $9,640, Bitcoin is more than 50% higher than its dip at the beginning of March. But I wouldn’t chase the price up by speculating on the cryptocurrency now.
All kinds of markets have been shooting up since the coronavirus crash. For example, look for proof in the prices of oil, gold, copper, iron ore, the FTSE 100 index, and the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
In some ways it all seems nuts. Some of those markets are ‘supposed’ to be counter-cyclical to each other. Such as gold going up while shares go down, and oil price falls boosting share prices.
However, this kind of exuberance almost across the board does tend to happen when markets have experienced a sudden and dramatic shock. For example, with the credit crunch in the noughties, all markets plunged seemingly together. There’s good logic in that. Nobody knew what would happen, or how badly events would affect individual markets, so there was a tendency to just sell everything.
A similar thing happened when the coronavirus hit. Investors first reaction was to dump almost everything and that’s why we saw the stock market crash along with many other markets.
Perhaps it’s rational for many markets to rise now. After all, we know more about how lockdowns are lifting and how economies are sputtering back into life. But I can see one potential problem. Rising markets tend to beget rising markets. Investors see the rises and start panic-buying for Fear of Missing Out (FOMO).
But FOMO-buying tends to lead to irrational buying divorced from the underlying value of a market, and it won’t last forever. Indeed, just as panic-selling can cause shares and markets to undershoot reasonable valuation on the downside, panic-buying can cause an overshoot of reasonable valuation on the upside.
And that makes markets such as Bitcoin look vulnerable. Because of a dearth of fundamentals, it’s hard to pin a fair valuation to Bitcoin. So speculation alone is probably driving the price. An overshoot looks practically assured to my eyes. And I wouldn’t want to be holding Bitcoin when the buying runs out and the reversal occurs.
However, the stock market is a bit more mixed. Some sectors are clearly struggling, such as travel, hospitality, airlines, and other cyclicals. It’s a stock-picker’s market and even Warren Buffett has turned his back on the airline companies and sold out of his holdings in the sector.
I wouldn’t touch bank shares with a bargepole either. But as Jim Cramer pointed out recently, some sectors are roaring ahead and there’s sound logic behind their advance in a world with Covid-19. My top five sectors, which I reckon are well-stocked hunting grounds, are healthcare, IT, food and consumer staples, drinks, and technology.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Kevin Godbold has no position in any share mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
