The FTSE 100 has had a great week, rising well above where it was just a few weeks ago. Hopes around treatments for Covid-19 coupled with the lifting of restrictions globally, have fuelled investor optimism. That’s despite the short-term pain likely to be felt by higher unemployment and business failures.
With share prices still far below where they started the year, it’s not too late for investors to catch further gains. There’s a risk, however, of a second spike of Covid-19, which investors should be wary of. History shows there’s a risk of a double-dip.
Nonetheless, for a long-term investor , the FTSE 100 has great companies trading at cheap valuations. In an age of negative interest rates, options for making your money grow are becoming harder to come by. Furthermore, the risk of a double-dip in the short-term is far from certain.
Investing in some of the UK’s most established companies could be very profitable. It can be done through a tracker, otherwise known as an ETF. These are cheap and don’t require much research. Or you can take more risk and buy shares in individual companies.
Another way to invest in many FTSE 100 companies is through an investment trust, which is run by a professional. This provides access to a larger number of holdings. These can often trade at a discount to their net asset value, so you get the shares for less than they should really be worth.
There’s been no lack of news recently about listed companies suspending or cutting their dividends. Shell, for example, massively reduced its dividend for the first time since the Second World War.
Depending on the economic recovery, however, there’s potential for dividends to be reintroduced, often from a more sustainable level than they were pre-coronavirus. Or, even without the reintroduction of dividends in the near term, there’s plenty of potential for capital growth from FTSE 100 shares. Many are now on very low price-to-earnings ratios.
It’s also worth remembering many companies are still paying a dividend. Some sectors are better than others for keeping dividends, so if income is important then consumer goods companies such as Unilever could make for a good investment as could utilities and supermarkets. Demand for their products isn’t going away, regardless of what happens to the economy.
Ultimately, I think FTSE 100 shares at the moment carry some risk but also a lot of potential for upside. This is why I prefer them to gold or bitcoin as an investment and hold a number myself, including Persimmon, National Grid, and Legal & General, to give just three examples.
Many FTSE 100 shares now trade on low P/Es, indicating they are cheap. Even looking at the economic data it’s clear governments are doing a lot to keep economies going and that’s helping share prices. This is why I think investing in solid FTSE 100 companies for a long time has the potential to make any investor far richer. Maybe even to make millions.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Andy Ross owns shares in Legal & General, National Grid and Persimmon. The Motley Fool UK owns shares of and has recommended Unilever. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
