There’s no denying Bitcoin has created a lot of wealth for some people over the past five years. Unfortunately, as the crypto market has boomed, so has fraud.
Hundreds of millions of dollars worth of Bitcoin have been stolen or lost and, due to the nature of the asset, it’s almost impossible to trace where they’ve gone. At the same time, it’s not got any easier to make transactions using cryptocurrency. Fees are still relatively high and can take days to transact.
So while Bitcoin might have gained mainstream attention, owning the asset is just as difficult and risky as ever. With this being the case, if you do want exposure to the asset, I would recommend buying a stock with exposure to Bitcoins instead.
There are three primary ways I’d play the Bitcoin price right now. Firstly, Nvidia is one of the world’s largest chipmakers and has carved out a specific niche in the graphics processing unit (GPU) market.
GPUs, which are more powerful than the traditional central processing units (CPU), are popular with miners. The company has seen a significant spike in demand for its products over the past few years as miners have rushed to take advantage of the Bitcoin price.
My second option is US market provider CME Group. This exchanged was the first significant exchange to launch Bitcoin futures and is planning to expand its offering later this year due to booming demand.
Thirdly, there’s London-listed CFD provider Plus500. This company registered a spike in profitability in 2017 and 2018 as traders rushed to try and bet on the Bitcoin price. It has since seen profits come under pressure due to a regulatory crackdown, but a price recovery could send profits skyrocketing again.
I think the three options are a great way to play the Bitcoin price although, from a longer-term perspective, I think it would make more sense to invest in the tech sector in general, rather than limit your options to just cryptocurrency. The world is in the midst of a tech revolution, and this is almost certain to continue. However, picking tech stocks can be tricky, and I think it is best left to the experts.
There’s a whole selection of tech-focused investment trusts and funds out there you can buy to profit not just from Bitcoin, but from cloud computing, hardware and artificial intelligence.
The Scottish Mortgage Trust is a great example. Over the past five years, this investment trust has returned 136%, outperforming its benchmark by 52% by betting on some of the markets hottest tech stocks. Meanwhile, the Polar Capital Technology Trust has returned 182% over the same time frame. The one downside of this investment trust is that it is quite expensive with an ongoing charges figure of 1%.
A cheaper alternative is the Allianz Technology Trust. This investment trust has a fairly similar investment portfolio to Polar, but its main difference is the fact that it charges just 0.48% per year. It has also outperformed its peer over the past five years, returning to 106% since the end of 2014.
Considering the track record of these managers, I’d rather invest my money with them over Bitcoin any day.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Rupert Hargreaves owns no share mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
