The recent stock market crash may have pushed some investors to own alternative assets such as Bitcoin rather than FTSE 250 stocks. However, despite the short term appeal of assets like Bitcoin, their long term prospects are far from certain.
Indeed, due to the way Bitcoin is structured, it is almost impossible to predict how much the cryptocurrency is really worth.
The price of Bitcoin is determined by supply and demand. If there are more buyers than sellers in the market, the price will go up. If there are more sellers than buyers, the price will fall.
The same is true for FTSE 250 stocks, to some extent, although there is one key difference. Their underlying businesses underpin the value of FTSE 250 shares. These firms have a fundamental value, which is relatively straightforward to calculate. It is impossible to do the same for Bitcoin.
For example, as FTSE 250 firms earn income from their operations. It’s quite straightforward to place a multiple on this income to arrive at an estimate of intrinsic value for the company. Bitcoin does not produce any income. Therefore, we can’t value the crypto-asset based on its profitability.
The long term prospects for FTSE 250 stocks are also more attractive than cryptocurrency.
Cryptocurrency has been around for quite a few years, but as of yet, it is not widely used as a currency. Regulatory demands and illegal activity have hamstrung its adoption. What’s more, there’s no guarantee it will ever replace traditional money. Regulators could even decide to ban it if it becomes the go-to currency for criminals.
On the other hand, stocks and shares have been around for hundreds of years. They are a tried and tested way of creating and building wealth. The FTSE 250 has only been in existence for three-and-a-half decades, but during this time it has produced an average annual return for investors of 12%.
At this rate of return, it would take six years to double your money. An investment of £100,000 would grow to be worth £1m within 20 years.
While it is impossible to tell what the future holds for stocks, there is a high chance investors will continue to see similar returns going forward. Company earnings should grow in line with inflation over the long term. This should help support share price growth of around 3% per annum.
Including dividends paid to investors, as well as any other form of shareholder return and technological advantages, which may lead to improved profit margins, it is not unrealistic to suggest that company earnings could grow in the 5% to 10% range for the foreseeable future.
That’s why FTSE 250 stocks are likely to be a better investment than Bitcoin over the long term. As such, buying a basket of these companies could help you grow your financial nest substantially in the years ahead.
If you're looking for growth shares to buy, our favourite is highlighted in the report below.
Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all fired up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the pandemic!).
But its capital-light, highly scalable business model has previously helped it deliver consistently high sales, astounding near-70% margins, and rising shareholder returns … in fact, in 2019 it returned a whopping £150m+ to shareholders in dividends and buybacks!
While COVID-19 may have thrown the company a curveball, management have acted swiftly to ensure this business is as well placed as it can be to ride out the current period of uncertainty… in fact, our analyst believes it should come roaring back to life, just as soon as normal economic activity resumes.
That’s why we think now could be the perfect time for you to start building your own stake in this exceptional business – especially given the shares look to be trading on a fairly undemanding valuation for the year to March 2021.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Growth Share… free of charge!
Rupert Hargreaves has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
