The 2020 stock market crash means that many UK shares now trade on low valuations. Although a recovery may seem unlikely at the present time, the track records of indices such as the FTSE 100 and FTSE 250 suggest that it is set to occur over the coming years.
As such, now could be the right time to buy a selection of stocks while they trade at attractive prices. They could deliver higher returns than gold or Bitcoin over the long run.
With that in mind, here are two UK shares that appear to offer margins of safety following their stock price falls in 2020. They could boost your portfolio returns, and help you to make a million.
Rightmove’s (LSE: RMV) recent stock price decline suggests that it could be worth buying in a portfolio of UK shares. The company’s market value has dropped by 13% since the start of the year, as lockdown measures have contributed to a 3.8% decline in its membership numbers. This may mean that the company’s sales come under pressure in the short run.
However, the business reported a relatively sound trading update recently. It noted that visits to its site have been high over recent weeks, while measures taken to improve its financial position could allow it to overcome what may prove to be a challenging period for the housing market.
With a dominant market position and a strong prospect of a long-term recovery in housing transactions, the outlook for the stock appears to be attractive. Certainly, further volatility is likely in the short run, as is the case for many UK shares. However, long-term investors could generate impressive returns from buying the stock today and holding it over the coming years.
Another FTSE 100 stock that could be worth adding to a portfolio of UK shares is GSK (LSE: GSK) . The company’s recent quarterly update showed that it is performing relatively well during what is a challenging period for many businesses. This defensive appeal could make it an attractive proposition at a time when the growth prospects for the world economy are very unpredictable.
As well as its relatively resilient business model, GSK is experiencing strong sales growth. For example, it reported a rise in revenue of 19% in the first quarter, with adjusted profit increasing by 26% over the same time period. With it also announcing developments to its pipeline, as well as plans to reshape its structure, the long-term prospects for the business could improve.
Therefore, after its 7% share price decline since the start of the year, GSK could offer good value for money. It may catalyse a portfolio of UK shares, and increase your chances of making a million over the long run.
It contains details of a UK-listed company our Motley Fool UK analysts are extremely enthusiastic about.
They think it’s offering an incredible opportunity to grow your wealth over the long term – at its current price – regardless of what happens in the wider market.
Because they believe it’s working both with the market… And against it.
Click here to get access to our presentation, and learn how to get the name of this 'double agent'!
Peter Stephens owns shares of GlaxoSmithKline. The Motley Fool UK owns shares of and has recommended GlaxoSmithKline. The Motley Fool UK has recommended Rightmove. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
