Some investors have turned to Bitcoin in the recent market crash as they try to protect their portfolios from further volatility.
Unfortunately, the cryptocurrency has not turned out to be the haven many thought it would be.
It plunged in value by 50% during the first few weeks of March. It has recovered some ground since, but it is difficult to tell if this rally is sustainable.
The problem is, as the Bitcoin price is determined by supply and demand, it is impossible to place an accurate value on the asset.
As such, FTSE 100 shares could be a better investment.
FTSE 100 dividend champion BT (LSE: BT.A) looks particularly attractive as an alternative to Bitcoin. After recent declines, shares in the telecoms giant are dealing at a price-to-earnings (P/E) ratio of just 5. The stock also supports a dividend yield of 9.4% .
While the company is unlikely to escape completely unscathed from the coronavirus outbreak, it is better positioned than most other businesses to weather the storm. For example, the group is one of the largest broadband providers in the UK. With so many people working from home, this is now an essential service.
What’s more, most of the company’s revenue comes from fixed-term monthly contracts. This provides BT with a steady income stream to meet obligations and pay its dividend.
That being said, the company’s dividend yield has been under threat for some time.
So, I think it is highly likely the distribution is going to reduced foreseeable future. Still, even a 50% reduction from current levels would leave the stock yielding just under 5%. That’s extremely attractive in the current interest rate environment.
BT’s P/E of 5 also suggests the stock offers a wide margin of safety. A return to its long-term average of around 10 could see the stock double from current levels.
Another FTSE 100 stock that could be a better investment than Bitcoin is Evraz (LSE: EVR) . As a major steel producer, Evraz’s income will almost certainly take a hit from the coronavirus outbreak.
However, the company is one of the most efficient steel producers in Europe. This should help it recover quickly when the tide turns.
At this point, it is not very easy to tell just when the tide will turn. But when it does, the stock could double. Evraz was on track to earn nearly $1bn in profits this year. That put the stock on a forward P/E of 4.5.
It could take a few years, but in the long run, it is likely the company’s profitability will return to this level. When it does, it is not unreasonable to suggest that the shares could command a P/E of around 10, suggesting they have the potential to double from current levels.
On top of this, the business has a good track record of returning excess cash to investors. Last year, for example, Evraz’s dividend yield jumped to more than 10%. That implies that when the recovery does come, investors could be in line for sizeable cash returns.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
Rupert Hargreaves owns no share mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies to store information. Press accesskey C to learn more about your options.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
