One key thing to remember when considering buying shares in Grayscale Bitcoin Trust is that it's not a true common stock. Stocks are shares in a company, while GBTC shareholders own part of an open-ended grantor trust.
Grantor trusts are required to hold a fixed portfolio, rather than a variable one. Such trusts often hold physical commodities and currencies. In this case, GBTC is a trust that only holds Bitcoin. Bear in mind that the Investment Company Act of 1940 does not cover grantor trusts, so they provide none of those investor protections. They also do not qualify for regulation by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
However grantor trusts are covered by the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and must disclose regular financial information.
The GBTC stock market price has been rallying in line with the price of Bitcoin. It has more than doubled in price after falling as low as 5.01 on Mar. 16. This was the lowest price since April 2019. It has now arguably formed a cup with handle base .
It is still lagging its potential buy point of 12.48, MarketSmith analysis shows . In addition, this would be a very aggressive entry, as the price declined by more than 63% when forming the base.
The relative strength line for GBTC stock is also disheartening for Bitcoin bulls. While it has recovered a near a one-year low, its rally has stalled and it is declining again. This is hardly the sign of a safe store of value. Indeed, its wild peaks and troughs will have left speculators badly burnt in the past.
Before the crash, GBTC stock had been clawing its way back toward last year's highs, but fell short after reaching 13.69 on Feb. 12. It had made decent progress after falling as low as 7.91 on Jan. 2, but was still well short of its late June peak of 17.40.
It was rising in line with the price of Bitcoin itself, which reached as high as $10,371.30 per Bitcoin on Feb. 12. Bitcoin then declined massively, hitting a recent low of 4,857.10 on March 11. It is now sitting just a few hundred bucks shy of the $10,000 mark.
Investors should be cautious, as the GBTC stock is inherently volatile. Those who got in at 2019's peak level of 17.40 are still deep underwater. It remains unclear whether they will ever recoup their losses.
A sign of how severe the coronavirus downtrend beat down GBTC stock is the fact it has been trading below its 50-day moving average since March 9. The 50-day fell short of moving back above the 200-day line during a recent rally attempt, and is sloping downward again, which is a bullish sign.
All of these moves reflect the ups and downs of Bitcoin.
The volatility would be more acceptable if GBTC stock were leading the market.
The Grayscale Bitcoin Trust now holds 1.7% of the circulating supply of Bitcoin, according to its latest quarterly report released Apr. 16. This is up 0.1% since the end of 2019.
"Quarter-over-quarter inflows more than doubled to $503.7 million, demonstrating demand is reaching new peak levels, even in a 'risk-off' environment," the report said.
Grayscale said hedge funds stumped up the vast majority of investment cash in Q1 2020, making up 88% of the total. The firm said its 10 funds, including GBTC, attracted over $500 million in investments.
Bitcoin rallied strongly in the first half of 2019, with gains accelerating after the Facebook ( FB ) Libra announcement , raising hopes for broader mainstream acceptance of digital currencies. That's despite evidence that most Americans aren't interested in Facebook Libra or owning Bitcoin.
Bitcoin rallied roughly 40% in the space of a few days after the Facebook Libra announcement. IBD warned that Bitcoin was flashing climax run signals once again. The digital currency soon fell from a high of $13,844 in late June 2019.
Amid deep skepticism from U.S. lawmakers and regulators, Facebook said Libra won't launch until U.S. policymakers' concerns are resolved.
Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg has argued that Libra will serve U.S. interests.
Fed chief Jerome Powell told Congress on Feb. 11 that Facebook's Libra project was a "wake-up call" that a digital currency could come "fairly quickly." He conceded that such a token could become "quite widespread and systemically important." Nevertheless he still thinks there are "many questions that need to be answered around digital currency for the United States."
Facebook is facing challenges on numerous fronts in addition to skepticism from regulators and lawmakers. The Libra Association has been hemorrhaging members . Libra Association is the collection of firms backing the currency.
The regulatory blowback has dealt a heavy toll to the cryptocurrency, and Facebook has scaled back its ambitions. The Libra Association announced April 16 that it now plans to offer stablecoins backed by just one nation's currency. This will be in addition to coins backed by multiple currencies. The move is an attempt to curry favor with skeptical regulators.
Nevertheless, Facebook is forging ahead with its plans. In late May the firm revealed it was changing the name of , the digital wallet it hopes will be used to access Libra from Calibra to Novi. The company boasted in a blog post the new name is inspired by the Latin words "novus" and "via," meaning "new" and "way." The Facebook subsidiary developing the company's digital wallet has also been redubbed Novi Financial.
Facebook has not announced a launch date for Novi, saying only that an "early version" will be launched when the Libra network goes live. The date for this is also undetermined.
Bitcoin is sometimes called "digital gold," enhancing the risk-adjusted returns of traditional investment portfolios. One key difference between gold and Bitcoin is the former is actually a physical asset, and has a number of uses besides being a commodity of exchange. For example almost 80% of gold consumed each years is made into jewelry. It is also a highly efficient conductor that is able to carry tiny electrical charges, so may even be used in the computer systems that are used to obtain Bitcoin through the mining process.
Gold is often a hedge against inflation or other economic or market uncertainty. Gold prices recently hit multiyear lows.
Meanwhile, Bitcoin and related instruments like GBTC have not been a store of value during the coronavirus crisis.
GBTC is trading at a fraction of its all-time high of 38.75. It achieved this at the height of Bitcoin-mania on Dec. 19, 2017. Indeed that climax peak trading day itself is a good example of Bitcoin Trust's wild volatility. After reaching that intraday high, GBTC closed at 33.23, and just three sessions later it traded as low as 12.71.
Is Owning Grayscale Bitcoin Trust The Same As Owning Bitcoin?
While GBTC is a trust that only holds Bitcoin, the GBTC stock market price does not exactly match the underlying Bitcoin price. Depending on investor sentiment, its shares can trade at a premium to its assets, or even at a discount to its total Bitcoin holdings.
However it is the fastest way stock market investors can get cryptocurrency exposure without actually buying their own Bitcoin. This is because regulators have not approved a Bitcoin ETF. Buying Bitcoin directly requires setting up and funding a separate account, often paying high trading fees.
Is GBTC A Good Investment?
Grayscale Bitcoin Trust, like the underlying Bitcoin, is prone to wild swings. Ultimately, it's a bet on Bitcoin, which is a speculative asset more than a real currency.
A volatile financial instrument with no real fundamentals that is not outperforming the broad stock market doesn't make a lot of sense.
Most investors would be better served studying the stock market, and compiling a watchlist of profitable companies setting up in proper bases, for stocks to buy .
For those willing to accept huge risks, GBTC does offer an opportunity for big gains. Investors can play GBTC based on technical factors like a typical stock. But those who invested in GBTC stock hoping to cash in on its strong progress in early 2020 have yet to recoup their losses.
Bottom line: GBTC is not a good buy right now.
