How Institutional Players Like CME, CBOE and Bakkt Influence the Bitcoin Price
The introduction of institutional heavyweights like CME, CBOE and Bakkt to the bitcoin space was heralded by many as the key to solidifying bitcoin’s mainstream acceptance, and driving prices to a stabilized moon. While this hasn’t played out exactly as some predicted, it is still early in the game, and bitcoin futures markets do arguably exert an influence on spot price. The quality and degree of said influence is debatable, but in this article we’ll look at a few ways the still young BTC derivative markets can potentially push and pull on the charts.
Also read: Liquid Gold vs Digital Gold: Why Bitcoin Beats Oil in the Current Climate
At the end of 2017, both the Chicago Board Options Exchange ( CBOE ) and Chicago Mercantile Exchange ( CME ), introduced trading in bitcoin futures . This afforded many previously hesitant segments of the world market safer exposure to an asset deemed too dangerous to touch by many. It further allowed traders in countries where bitcoin was illegal or heavily restricted to benefit from the movements of BTC markets.
There is much debate as to if and how these markets significantly affect the bitcoin spot price, but comparing markets at specific times and climates can help analysts draw their own conclusions. When regulated BTC futures came on the scene in early December 2017, for example, bitcoin prices were already in rapid ascent.
On December 10, the day CBOE bitcoin futures launched, the BTC spot price saw a rise of over 10% and some speculated that the run up and meteoric rise of BTC to a December 17 all-time high of nearly $20,000 owed in part to excitement surrounding CME and CBOE futures. CBOE was the first to debut. CME futures had made their announcement two months earlier, in October, and notably launched on the exact day of the ATH, to see prices begin a precipitous decline soon after.
Of course, many factors other than BTC futures are said to have played into the high bitcoin prices of late 2017 and early 2018. 2017 was the year of the ICO , with exciting and questionable projects popping up everywhere. Crypto was, prior to the regulations and reigning in of markets in years that followed, still a kind of financial Wild West.
While there are theories about financial giants manipulating markets by taking short positions in futures markets, and subsequently influencing public perception negatively via mainstream media, these accusations of market manipulation are hard to prove. Still, bitcoin futures did provide bearish investors a new means by which to short crypto markets, and some speculated this is what preceded the ensuing fall in price in 2018.
Entrance of Bakkt BTC-Settled Futures, Price Gap Hypothesis
When Intercontinental Exchange-owned Bakkt entered the scene with physically settled BTC futures in September 2019, regulated futures market influence on spot price became less theoretical. Unlike the CME bitcoin futures which are cash settled, Bakkt’s bitcoin settled futures are fully collateralized, and require the movement of actual BTC at contract expiry.
Bakkt's BTC Futures Open Interest reaches a new all-time high. pic.twitter.com/9ve3pdqCtT
— skew (@skewdotcom) February 6, 2020
Hitting a new all-time high on February 6 this year, Bakkt’s open interest seemed to trace a 17% rise in BTC spot price which started January 24th. It makes sense that futures markets could be correspondingly affected by BTC spot price, but this doesn’t always seem to be the case historically.
Evidenced by record numbers for Bakkt in November 2019, in the midst of a $1,000 BTC market plunge, institutional futures sometimes seem to hold their own. Of course, the product had just launched in September, and some might assign novelty and bullish sentiment regarding institutional involvement as the driving force there. Still, from November 2019 until the new year BTC spot prices would hover relatively steady at just over $7,000, lending to speculation about the power of institutional involvement for spot price stability.
Example of a CME price gap being filled.
Price gaps in futures markets are another point of interest. As news.Bitcoin.com’s Jamie Redman pointed out in February , spot prices tend to follow and “fill” price gaps in futures markets. A gap in CME futures in that same month, for example, was followed by an almost immediate correction on the spot market when futures trading reopened. However, these predictions do not always pan out. Some recently predicted there were “no more gaps” on March 10, and that a bull run was in the works. Prices would plummet almost $4,000 in the next few days.
Bakkt and CME bitcoin futures have taken a big hit due to the economic recession now underway as a result of coronavirus fears and ensuing business and travel shutdowns, with crypto analytics group skew noting a “50% collapse in bitcoin futures open interest last week.” There is almost no activity on the CME options front, and the same goes for an even worse-off Bakkt.
— skew (@skewdotcom) March 18, 2020
CBOE, for it’s part, announced it would no longer be offering bitcoin futures back in March 2019, but current contracts remain tradeable until they expire in June.
Whether institutional futures and options markets may step in here with greater contract numbers and surprise speculators as in previous dips is uncertain. As spot prices continue to be affected by media and bitcoin whales moving financial clout, institutional players like Bakkt and CME inarguably offer a relatively new and regulated forum by which movers and shakers in the crypto world can find novel ways to leverage markets, and by which analysts can learn more about BTC spot price and how it moves relative to these.
With heavy regulation, though, comes risk and dependence. Perpetually waiting for the SEC to approve a bitcoin exchange traded fund , for example, doesn’t exactly sound like the decentralized or permissionless crypto mainstreaming a lot of Satoshi acolytes want. Further, the more bitcoin moves into institutional money, the more sway these legacy and regulatory financial powers will be able to exercise over market prices, for better or for worse.
Do you think institutional players are good for bitcoin? Let us know in the comments section below.
Want to create your own secure cold storage paper wallet? Check our tools section. You can also enjoy the easiest way to buy Bitcoin online with us. Download your free Bitcoin wallet and head to our Purchase Bitcoin page where you can buy BCH and BTC securely.
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
