Many early adopters who made a fortune from cryptocurrency first got their hands on coins by receiving them for free from bitcoin faucets back in the day. Today there are still a number of ways for you to get bitcoin for free including airdrops, giveaways, bounties, tipping, referral programs and faucets.
If you want to start stacking satoshis or test out using digital assets without having to spend any money, there are several options available for you to do so in 2020. This guide will present some of them before reviewing a few bitcoin faucets that are still operational today.
One of the best ways to get coins is to earn them from something that you already do. So if you have a website, blog or even just a large following of friends online, you can capitalize on that by joining a referral program that pays in crypto.
Bitcoin.com offers such a program for Bitcoin Games, a provably fair online casino where users can play popular games using BTC and BCH . It requires no registration and lets you earn up to 25% of the house edge on all bets made by people you direct to the platform, with no top limit on how much you can earn. To join this program all you have to do is go to the BCH referral page or the BTC referral page , and your account will already be automatically set up. There you can find your unique referral link and banners in many shapes and sizes to share. The same page can also be used to track your earnings and referral statistics.
Another referral program from the company is offered by the privacy-focused peer to peer exchange local.Bitcoin.com . It enables you to share your referral link with anyone you think might be interested in trading on the marketplace and earn BCH for every trade they make. Once you have an account on the platform, just visit the referral page to get a unique referral link that you can share with your friends. This link will take them to a signup page, and when they create an account they will be added to your list of referred users. You will earn 20% of fees incurred by their trades throughout the lifetime of their account.
Speaking of Bitcoin.com Local, the platform recently added a dedicated portal for buying and selling items in exchange for bitcoin cash. This Marketplace is a Craigslist-like venue for listing goods and services that allows anyone to earn BCH directly. So if you have an old smartphone or anything else you don’t use anymore you can sell it secondhand and turn it into free coins.
An additional way to sell your services for BCH is to become a bitcoin bounty hunter if you have the skills to spot software bugs or track down hackers. The Bitcoin Bounty Hunter service from Bitcoin.com allows people to anonymously crowdsource payments for completing tasks and get paid in bitcoin cash, with more than $280,000 in bounties currently available on the platform .
Another way to get some free tokens is giveaways. Many in the crypto community are committed to spreading adoption and if you follow influencers on Twitter, Reddit, Youtube and other community forums you’ll sometimes find someone who will be willing to send you some satoshis just to get you started. For example, about four moths ago Bitcoin.com Executive Chairman Roger Ver announced on Facebook he was giving away a total of $5,000 worth of BCH to his friends and anyone on the social network that posted a bitcoin cash address in response to the message.
Before trying this, take note that there are a lot of scammers in the field impersonating influencers, so you have to watch out for red flags and never send William Shatner or Elon Musk any coins if they promise to send you back 100x more.
Crypto communities also like to reward active members with free tokens from time to time. In the BCH ecosystem we can see this with the Lead SLP token which you can earn in a number of ways such as helping new users learn about bitcoin cash by hosting meetups, introducing BCH to businesses that will adopt it for payments and more.
Tipping is also popular in some crypto communities and allows people to be rewarded for their participation with free coins. In January 2020 it was reported that in just one week close to $6,000 in BCH was tipped to authors on read.cash , the blogging website that lets readers boost content creators with bitcoin cash upvotes.
Airdrops are a way for projects to introduce a new token that’s just been added to a trading platform by handing some out to users for free. To find these you need to follow the online conversation around projects you like in community forums and social media, where you’re sure to come across new airdrops from time to time. And sometimes exchanges also offer less direct ways to get new coins they list such as Coinbase Earn . This is a service meant to incentivize people to learn more about new cryptos by awarding tokens for completing tasks such as watching videos and taking quizzes on the asset-related content. Once all these tokens become liquid you can exchange them for your preferred crypto such as BCH or BTC .
Software developer Gavin Andresen made Bitcoin History when he created a website that gave away free BTC in June 2010. The first bitcoin faucet handed out a meager 5 BTC per request, now worth about $50,000 less than a decade after.
“For my first Bitcoin coding project, I decided to do something that sounds really dumb: I created a web site that gives away Bitcoins,” wrote the man who was declared by Satoshi Nakamoto as the lead developer after his departure. “Why? Because I want the Bitcoin project to succeed, and I think it is more likely to be a success if people can get a handful of coins to try it out.”
To fuel the first faucet, Andresen loaded it with 1,100 BTC of his own. After these were all given out, the faucet was reloaded, with early bitcoin miners and whales chipping in and donating more coins. By the time the faucet had given away its last coins in early 2011 and was discontinued, 19,715 BTC had passed through its wallet.
Unfortunately, these days any website claiming to offer 5 BTC for free is an obvious scam. Moreover, the inconsistent and high transaction fees on the BTC network have made giving away even just 5 satoshis per user impracticable too. If it can take 50 cents for sending one transaction, no site can be expected to send micro-transactions worth much less than that. So BTC faucets had to stop operating or try to find ways to limit users from making direct and small withdrawals.
For example, the Bitcoinker faucet claims you can get “up to 100,000 satoshis” every five minutes. However, the minimum withdrawal from the site to your actual BTC wallet is 20,000 satoshis and trying it out you only get an average of 5 satoshis every time. So you will have to solve the captcha on the site 4,000 times, which assuming you did every five minutes without a break would take about four days.
Other sites claiming to still be BTC faucets are actually something else completely. Some are actually gambling sites that just offer a few free satoshis to start you off but there is only a minuscule chance you will win enough to reach the withdrawal minimum without putting in more BTC of your own. Some are actually online freelance platforms that require you to put in work, such as answering surveys or completing other tasks. Some websites might also be secretly using your browser for mining an altcoin in the background, exploiting your CPU and giving you a fraction of what you could have made yourself.
Luckily, there is still a very good alternative.
The Bitcoin.com Free service really provides you with an easy way to get coins for free thanks to the extremely low fees on the bitcoin cash network that make it possible. More than 300,000 people have gotten free BCH from this faucet service already, in a process that takes two seconds if you already have our wallet or a few seconds more if you need to download it depending on your connection speed.
All you need to do to receive some bitcoin cash from the Bitcoin.com Free service is to take three easy steps. First, you have to install the highly rated Bitcoin.com Wallet app for your phone if you don’t already have it. Then you need to log in to the faucet with your Google account and hit verify in order to prevent abuse of the service. Finally, just enter your wallet address to claim your free electronic cash. A small amount of BCH will be sent to your wallet within seconds, showcasing the amazing speed of the bitcoin cash network.
What do you think about getting free cryptocurrency in 2020? Do you know any other ways people can get some free coins? Share your thoughts in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: Walkthrough and guide editorials are intended for informational purposes only. There are multiple security risks and methods that are ultimately made by the decisions of the user. There are various steps mentioned in reviews and guides and some of them are optional. Neither Bitcoin.com nor the author is responsible for any losses, mistakes, skipped steps or security measures not taken, as the ultimate decision-making process to do any of these things is solely the reader’s responsibility. For good measure always cross-reference guides with other walkthroughs found online.
Verify and track bitcoin cash transactions on our BCH Block Explorer , the best of its kind anywhere in the world. Also, keep up with your holdings, BCH and other coins, on our market charts at Bitcoin.com Markets , another original and free service from Bitcoin.com.
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
