If you’re one of the many people looking to get into bitcoin for the first time, it doesn’t have to be hard. There are more than a few easy routes to acquiring cryptocurrency and this article aims to outline five of them. By way of these simple avenues for purchasing bitcoin you can be stacking and spending satoshis in no time.
As the crypto market is alive with gains recently, renewed interest in bitcoin has taken hold yet again. For those new to crypto, the first step can be the hardest: simply “getting in.” While there is definitely a learning curve to some aspects of crypto, buying, storing and using bitcoin doesn’t need to be complicated. Below we’ll cover five easy ways to buy bitcoin. Before moving forward, though, it’s important to know what kind of bitcoin you want to buy. Information on the difference between bitcoin cash (BCH) and bitcoin core (BTC) can be found here.
One of the more rewarding, direct, and private ways to buy bitcoin is through a direct transaction with a seller. This could be a trusted friend or acquaintance living nearby, or someone at a bitcoin meetup looking to sell crypto for cash. Local bitcoin meetups are great places to connect with other crypto enthusiasts, and often members like to trade while in attendance. If this is the route you choose to take, be sure to learn about some best practices and tips for safe trading in person, first.
Another way to buy directly is to connect with a seller via a peer-to-peer platform like local.Bitcoin.com where buyers can select a variety of payment methods including Paypal, bank transfer, and cash-in-person. You can even trade goods for crypto via the site. Each user has different offers and charges different rates, so be sure to choose a seller with a good reputation, fair price, and history of completed trades.
Local.bitcoin.com focuses exclusively on bitcoin cash ( BCH ), but there are other platforms that provide similar peer-to-peer services for buying bitcoin core ( BTC ), like Localbitcoins . Each platform for buying crypto peer-to-peer requires different amounts of identification to make a trade. For example, local.Bitcoin.com only requires an email address and is extremely private, while other platforms can require extensive details via their know your customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) policies.
A very easy way to buy some bitcoin is to use a credit card. This can be done at buy.Bitcoin.com , and users can choose to purchase either bitcoin cash or bitcoin core.
Once you click the buy button, there’s a prompt to enter a bitcoin wallet address. For users without a bitcoin wallet, there are instructions linked via the “Need a wallet?” option that can provide assistance in downloading one for free. Though this buy option charges a set service fee, the trade-off is that it’s very convenient and quick. Also, all that is required is an email address.
Bitcoin ATMs are popping up all over the place and provide a convenient means for investing in cryptocurrencies. Due to applicable regulations, this option is typically not as private as a direct, peer-to-peer trade, but for buyers comfortable with sharing some personal information, these machines can provide an easy on-ramp to the world of crypto.
The site Coinatmradar site is a good resource for locating a machine near you. Users can select their location, the type of crypto they wish to buy or sell, and find an ATM nearby. The service also provides info on the individual ATMs submitted by providers and users regarding the machine’s current status. For buyers in California, U.S., many popular Coinstar kiosks now feature a bitcoin buy option as well.
An established and reputable cryptocurrency exchange can be a relatively simple and convenient way to buy bitcoin with credit card or via bank account. As with peer-to-peer trading platforms, each exchange will have different KYC/AML requirements, fees, capabilities and special offers, so it’s important to research any potential choice carefully before making a decision.
Crypto exchanges for beginners which are very popular include Binance , Coinbase , and Kraken . Bitcoin.com now also has its own crypto exchange . Mainstream exchanges usually provide the option to buy bitcoin with a credit card or through bank account deposit.
An important thing to note about exchanges, however, is that if your bitcoin is stored custodially (meaning you don’t have the private keys) and the exchange is hacked or experiences problems, you may lose your money. This is why it is advisable to move funds to a private, non-custodial wallet as soon as possible after purchasing bitcoin, and to only keep the bare minimum of what’s needed to transact on a centrally managed exchange.
What is your preferred method for buying bitcoin? Let us know in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, or companies. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Did you know you can verify any unconfirmed Bitcoin transaction with our Bitcoin Block Explorer tool ? Simply complete a Bitcoin address search to view it on the blockchain. Plus, visit our Bitcoin Charts to see what’s happening in the industry.
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
