Over the past year, those investing in Bitcoin would have seen gains of 25%. This is remarkable, given the turmoil that other investments like stocks and shares have suffered.
In fact, what makes the performance of Bitcoin even more extraordinary is the bounce it has seen since its low in March. Since then, it has rebounded by approximately 84%.
On the face of it then, investors should load up on Bitcoin. But there is more to the story than that.
Although Bitcoin’s price has surged recently, it remains a wildly volatile investment. Earlier this month, the price of a Bitcoin reached recent highs of $10,000. However, it should be noted that this figure represents nearly a 50% drop in its value since its highs in December 2017.
This volatility is down to the cryptocurrency having no intrinsic value. And this is the problem I have with Bitcoin: it has no meaningful value.
Bitcoin has no fundamentals. Without fundamentals, it is impossible to put an accurate figure on what Bitcoin’s price should be and to tell if you are overpaying for it.
In time, the demand for Bitcoin may fall, leaving investments worthless. People invest in Bitcoin with the hope that someone will buy it at a higher price in the future. In this way, it is similar to purchasing a piece of art in the hope that its value will eventually soar.
So why are FTSE 100 stocks and shares different?
When you purchase FTSE 100 shares, you are buying a part of a business. This means that you take an interest in every aspect of its operation. The company’s revenue, profitability, cash flow, and debt will all play a part in how the market values the company in the long term.
The FTSE 100 has indeed crashed multiple times since its formation in 1984. However, it has always recovered in subsequent years. Bitcoin does not have this sort of heritage.
Investing with a long-term outlook is the best strategy when buying stocks and shares. This should enable market wobbles to be ridden out and for compound interest to work its magic.
As well as investing for growth, FTSE 100 stock buyers can focus on income. I believe dividends make investing in shares more attractive than Bitcoin, and can provide a way to attain passive income. If dividends are reinvested and used to buy more shares, this speeds up the process of compounding interest.
I think it pays to avoid investing in fads and get-rich-quick schemes. Benjamin Graham put it best when he said “in the short run, the market is a voting machine but in the long run it is a weighing machine”.
Although history might not repeat itself, over longer periods the FTSE 100 has continued to grow. Now could be a great opportunity to buy a part of wonderful companies at ultra-low prices. That is where I would put my money right now.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
T Sligo has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
