"If the cryptocurrency succeeds as real money, the government will make the cryptocurrency illegal and eliminate it," Rogers told Japan's Aera dot in comments translated by Google.
Rogers is perhaps best-known for co-founding the Quantum Fund QMCO with fellow legend George Soros and has gone on to establish himself as a television and media personality.
Bitcoin, still mostly used as an instrument of speculation , has attracted attention in recent months as the coronavirus pandemic has spread and governments have taken extreme action to support their economies.
The U.S. has allocated almost $3 trillion for coronavirus-related economic aid and the Federal Reserve has pumped trillions of dollars into the U.S. economy.
Renowned investors including Paul Tudor Jones, Dan Tapiero and Raoul Pal have named bitcoin as a potential hedge against the inflation unprecedented central bank stimulus measures could bring, though bitcoin is still far from being used as "real money." Some 11 million bitcoin, roughly 60% of the current minted supply, has sat dormant for a whole year, according to a recent research report published by Digital Asset Data—suggesting investors are "buying to hold."
However, governments around the world, spurred on by China's efforts to digitalize its yuan and Facebook's plans for a bitcoin-inspired digital currency, have accelerated their efforts to take money and spending online. "The government likes electronic money," Rogers said. "Because with electronic money, you can track when, where, who spent what amount. Governments will have more control over people through electronic money."
"The government wants to know everything. Controllable electronic money will survive, and virtual currencies beyond the influence of the government will be banned."
Many in the bitcoin community see cryptocurrencies as a way of resisting government overreach and some fear a proposed digital U.S. dollar could hand more power to the state. Rogers' comments could throw fuel on those fears. "The government has something that those who work with virtual currencies don't have," Rogers said. "It's guns."
The bitcoin price , still highly volatile and prone to wild swings , is increasingly being watched by Wall Street as they launch bitcoin and cryptocurrency services and take on clients in the space.
The bitcoin price has climbed over the last year but remains far from its all-time highs of around ... [+] $20,000 per bitcoin.
Rogers has a dim view of bitcoin's long term value, however, predicting it will eventually collapse.
"I believe that the virtual currency represented by bitcoin will decline and eventually become zero," Rogers said, adding: "This is a clear bubble and I don't know the right price. Virtual currency is not an investment target.”
Despite this, Rogers admits bitcoin could be the longest surviving cryptocurrency.
"Many have already come and gone, so we'll see," he said, speaking after his comments were published by Aera dot.
Editor’s note: This article has been edited to more accurately reflect Jim Rogers’s position towards bitcoin.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
