"While scarce and durable, bitcoin also is divisible, verifiable, portable, and transferable, a range of monetary characteristics that confer superior utility, potentially driving demand and deeming it suitable, if not superior, for the role of global digital money," Ark Invest analyst Yassine Elmandjra wrote .
Ark, a bullish Tesla investor known for its massive $7,000 price target on Tesla stock, sees bitcoin potentially reaching 10% of gold's market capitalization in just five years—up from around 1% now.
Ark originally bought into bitcoin back in 2015 when it was trading for just $230 per token, buying shares in Grayscale's Bitcoin Investment Trust. Ark cashed out its Grayscale stake in 2018, telling CNBC it was a "complicated decision" driven more by regulatory and tax-related concerns than by the "merits" of bitcoin itself.
However, Ark continues to hold bitcoin in its "undisclosed, separately managed accounts," Elmandjra said via email.
"We believe, as a suitable contender for the first global digital money, bitcoin should attract demand similar, at a minimum, to that for gold," Elmandjra said, writing in response to Wall Street giant Goldman Sachs' recent dismissal of bitcoin and warning "bitcoin’s complexity should not prevent financial institutions from analyzing it in depth."
"Yet, contrary to claims that it is in a massive bubble, bitcoin’s network value—or market cap—is less than 2% that of gold’s," Elmandjra said, adding that while bitcoin is "often called digital gold, we believe bitcoin not only shares many of gold’s characteristics but also improves upon them."
Ark analysts have predicted bitcoin's network value could reach 10% of gold's total value by 2025.
"Among the few assets up in this tumultuous year, gold and bitcoin are building foundations for further price appreciation, in our view," Bloomberg researchers wrote in a June 2020 commodity report.
Bitcoin's performance this year in the face of market turmoil sparked by the coronavirus pandemic has led to investors including the likes of Paul Tudor Jones, Dan Tapiero and Raoul Pal naming the cryptocurrency as a potential hedge against the inflation unprecedented central bank stimulus measures could bring.
"As the bitcoin network continues to mature, we believe that it will cement bitcoin’s role as an emerging monetary asset and that financial institutions will do well to consider it seriously," Elmandjra said.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
