On November 21, the Chinese mining rig manufacturer Canaan Inc. launched its initial public offering (IPO) sale of $90 million worth of U.S. shares. Canaan shares initially sold for $8.99, but plummeted over 48% on December 16 to $4.65 per share. Since then, Canaan has launched a series of five new mining rig batches that process between 48 terahash per second (TH/s) to 68TH/s for January and February delivery periods. Canaan stock sold on the Nasdaq Global Market has also managed to jump back 39% since the significant plunge in mid-December.
Months ago, three giant mining rig firms from China, Bitmain, Canaan, and Ebang, failed to IPO on the primary stock exchange in Hong Kong. Then Canaan surprised everyone when the mining rig manufacturer filed for its initial public stock offering in October with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Following the IPO filing by Canaan, rumors have been circulating that both Ebang and Bitmain are filing for IPO status in the U.S. as well. Canaan’s stock is called CAN ( NASDAQ: CAN ) and the shares were added to Nasdaq on November 21 with a standard opening ceremony. During the first day of trading, CAN lost a few pennies per share, but then dropped 7.68% on November 23rd’s trading sessions. By mid-December Canaan’s public shares were down 48% before regaining some ground.
Canaan’s shares jumped from an all-time low of $4.65 on December 16 to rise 11% the very next day. However, after another day of trading on Nasdaq, CAN dropped even lower to $4.63 a share. Canaan’s stock has been seemingly following BTC ’s market footsteps and the stock value started to rise alongside BTC ’s gradual climb. On January 9, CAN was trading for $6.49 per share and the stock is up 6% today. Market observers can’t pinpoint exactly why Canaan’s stock slumped during its first month out of the gate but it’s not uncommon for nascent shares to slide. However, speculators think that the CAN stock will follow alongside BTC ’s price movements and have noted that Canaan has stiff competition. Following the IPO, Canaan has released a total of five high-powered bitcoin miners with 48-68TH/s. Chinese mining rig competitors like Bitmain and Innosilicon have also released a number of miners in the wake of Canaan’s initial IPO upset.
Canaan Creative’s February mining rig batch.
Canaan’s store is now selling February batches of the new Avalonminer 1166 series (68TH/s) at $1,978 per unit. The next generation Avalonminer is roughly the same price as Innosilicon’s Terminator 3+ Pro 67TH/s machine at $1,999 per unit. Canaan also has a lower model machine, the Avalonminer 1146 ($1,204 per unit with 56TH/s), as both the 1166 and 1146 are scheduled for February delivery. Now Canaan patrons can purchase miners that will deliver in January as the company is selling three versions of the Avalonminer 1066 series. These three miners process between 48-50TH/s and sell for $1,032 to $1,075 per unit. However, Bitmain shoppers can get January shipping for mining rigs that produce between 40-64TH/s and prices are a couple hundred less.
Canaan’s competitor Bitmain is selling a 70TH/s machine with a February shipping date.
If a customer wanted to wait the same timeframe for the Avalonminer 1166 series (68TH/s) but purchase Bitmain’s Antminer S17+ (70TH/s) they would save $323 per unit. Miners should also keep in mind that the Avalonminer 1166 takes around 3196W off the wall, while the Antminer S17+ takes 2800W. That’s a reference power efficiency difference of 40 joules per terahash (J/TH) for the Antminer S17+ to the 47J/TH for Canaan 68TH/s model.
Innosilicon has 67TH/s machines for sale right now ($1,999) on a first paid, first serve basis. The price is $21 more than Canaan’s Avalonminer 1166 series ($1,978 per unit with 68TH/s).
The Avalonminer 1166 power consumption is similar to Innosilicon’s Terminator 3+ Pro 67TH/s device which uses 3300W. Another competitor Canaan has to deal with is the Chinese firm Microbt which is selling the Whatsminer M21S ($1,299 per unit with 56TH/s). Microbt recently slashed the M21S price after initially charging $1,749 per mining rig and the company claims items ship 1-2 business days after the payment is settled.
Microbt’s best model right now claims 56TH/s and is $1,299 per unit. Whatsminers leverage Samsung’s 8nm semiconductors.
The rising BTC prices might help Canaan’s shares sell better, but as far as manufacturing sales, the company has stiff competition. All of the Chinese mining rig manufacturers seem to be well-stocked with devices and are betting on investors ‘arming their farms’ with high-powered miners. Canaan’s public shares, however, could help the company a touch longer if the bull run doesn’t happen right away. Right now as far as 50TH/s to 70TH/s next-generation miners are concerned, there’s a high supply thanks to Canaan, Bitmain, Innosilicon, and Microbt. Out of all the competitors, Bitmain and Canaan have more choices as far as the mining rigs available for people looking for hashrates between 40-70TH/s.
What do you think about Canaan’s public stock performance over the last month? What do you think about Canaan’s new mining rigs and the stiff competition the company faces? Let us know what you think about this topic in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, mining rigs, services, mining rig manufacturers or companies. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any ideas, software, mining rigs, mining rig manufacturers, websites, concepts, content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Image credits: Shutterstock, Canaan , Bitmain , Microbt , Innosilicon , Wiki Commons, Fair Use, and Pixabay.
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
