The documents reveal the U.S. Department of Defence has seriously considered the possibility bitcoin ... [+] could be used by future rebellions.
Bitcoin has increasingly been adopted by Wall Street and the world's biggest financial institutions since its 2017 price explosion but remains a tool to fight government control.
The Pentagon war game documents have been revealed after Florida Republican Representative Matt Gaetz called for the government to "freeze " the money of demonstrators after country-wide protests over the killing of George Floyd turned violent this month.
"One of the most important tools in the authoritarian toolkit is the ability to freeze the funding of legitimate political dissent," Nathaniel Whittemore, a bitcoin and cryptocurrency consultant and strategist, said previously .
"By separating the infrastructure of money from the infrastructure of state power, bitcoin makes it that much harder for this type of politically motivated confiscation."
"In the wake of unprecedented central bank action around the Covid-19 crisis, it seemed like the most relevant narrative of bitcoin in 2020 was as a hedge against inflation," Whittemore said.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
