Researchers asked, "what if institutional investors allocated 1% of assets under management to ... [+] bitcoin"--finding such inflows could send the bitcoin price sharply higher and potentially giving bitcoin a market capitalization of over $1 trillion.
Expectations that institutional investors could be about to buy into bitcoin and cryptocurrencies is thought to have contributed to bitcoin's 2017 price explosion, which saw the bitcoin price rise from under $1,000 per bitcoin to around $20,000 in under 12 months.
These hopes petered out through 2018 but have recently returned, with some , including co-founder of social news aggregation site Reddit and early investor in major U.S. bitcoin and crypto exchange Coinbase, Alexis Ohanian, recently predicting a new bitcoin and "crypto spring."
"In anticipation of [institutions'] hopeful arrival, firms have raised more than $1 billion in order to build infrastructure to serve them," Watkins wrote. "And deal activity is picking up as the perfect storm appears to be brewing for investment in bitcoin."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
