Square’s revenue will take a hit in Q2, however, as it announced a refund of sellers’ software subscription fees for March and April and introduced options for sellers to pause subscriptions temporarily based on their circumstances.
A positive longer-term trend, though, is GPV mix by seller size.
Between Q1 2018 and Q1 2020, Square’s percentage of GPV from merchants with more than $500,000 annualized GPV grew from 20% to 25% as the percentage from merchants with less than $125,000 GPV dropped from 53% to 48%.
At $528 million, Cash App’s revenue for Q1 2020 was nearly triple that of Q1 2019. A large part of that was $306 million in Bitcoin revenue, up from $65 million the previous year.
Excluding Bitcoin, Cash App revenues were nearly doubled year-over-year. This revenue is primarily composed of: 1) transaction fees from Cash App Instant Deposit and Cash Card, and 2) interest earned on customer funds.
Revenue (including Bitcoin) per user for Cash App nearly doubled year-over-year in Q1 2020 to a little more than $21.
(Note: Square reported that 2018 ended with 15 million Cash App users, and 24 million at the end of 2019. To calculate revenue per user, I added 1 million to the previous year-ending total for Q1 2019 and 2020).
In addition, Square expanded its direct deposit customer base from 3 million in February to 14 million by the middle of April.
Cash App achieved its highest direct deposit volume during April, up three times the March level. Square customers had more than $1.3 billion in cash balances stored in their accounts as of the end of April.
“Cash App is now used for tax refunds, stimulus deposit, and work paycheck deposit. Also, as retail investing surged during the stay-home period, Cash App has allowed people to buy equities and bitcoin with widely accessible features such as fractional investing and recurring purchases.”
Square Capital facilitated approximately 75,000 loans in the first quarter of 2020, totaling $548 million, representing 8% growth year over year.
In addition, Square distributed $520 million in Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans, averaging about $12,000 per loan, and generating roughly $25 million in fees.
Unlike some banks—notably Bank of America and Wells Fargo—Square didn’t require PPP borrowers to have previous account relationships stating:
“You don't have to process your payments with Square, but you must have a Square account. If you don't have a Square account, you can create one here.”
Why is Square Such a Threat to Banks?
In Cornerstone Advisors’ 2020 What’s Going On in Banking study, just over half of the bank executives surveyed said Big Tech companies are a significant threat to banks. Just over a third thought fintech firms (like Square) would be a threat.
What's Going On in Banking survey of 305 bank and credit union executives, Q4 2019
Two-thirds of bankers are missing the big picture here. Square is a major threat to banks because of:
1) Deposit displacement. Square’s growth in direct deposit customers is impressive—but misleading. The 14 million total includes customers who direct deposited their stimulus checks and/or tax refunds—not necessarily their paychecks.
But that’s still $1+ billion in Square’s coffers that likely would have gone to banks.
And by enabling Cash App customers to invest that money (Bitcoin or not), Square is preventing someone else (e.g., Robinhood) from deposit displacing them.
2) Payment displacement. Square no longer reports Cash Card payment volume separately. When they last did, in 2018, the numbers suggested $3 billion of annual spending on the card.
The year-over-year increase in non-Bitcoin Cash App revenue and revenue per user suggests that Cash Card spending is on a strong trajectory—and is cannibalizing card volume on bank-issued cards.
Banks, meanwhile, may enjoy strong adoption of Zelle, but so what? Where’s the monetization? In reality, it’s just the opposite—the more people that sign up for Zelle, the more it costs banks.
3) Loan displacement. Square suspended its Flex Loans in Q1 when the Covid crisis hit and that caused the decline in loan volume between Q4 2019 and Q1 2020.
But the shift in seller mix towards larger merchants is good news for Square, as it promises continued growth in GPV as the economy recovers.
It’s also good news for Square Capital as it gives that unit a better—from a credit quality perspective—merchant base to lend to.
In addition, Square Capital’s 75,000 PPP borrowers may give Square Capital new opportunities to rev up lending post-crisis.
With a growing base of larger merchants—and intimate knowledge of their revenue flows—Square is poised to take small business lending volume away from banks looking to the small business segment to recoup declining loan volume.
4) Bitcoin. Don’t discount the importance of Bitcoin to Square’s growth. The story is about more than just the huge growth in revenue year-over-year. It’s about who Square is attracting to the Cash App.
A study from Cornerstone Advisors found that a little more than one in 10 consumers between the ages of 3o and 53 (older Millennials and Gen Xers) held some form of cryptocurrency at the time of the survey in late 2018. More than a third earn more than $100,000 a year and nearly four in 10 have a Master’s degree or higher.
As a result, Square is likely attracting a highly desirable customer base with its Bitcoin offering. And that’s something challenger banks like Chime can’t claim.
5) Acquisition. At the end of 2019, InvestorPlace said Square could be “one of the great takeover stories of 2020.”
Granted, that was when its market cap was nearly one-third lower than it is today.
With the consolidation happening in the payments space, however, banks should be concerned about who might acquire Square. An Intuit acquisition of Square would be complementary to the firm’s small business capabilities as well as with the newly-acquired Credit Karma unit.
Amazon and Google are on a path to become vendors or distribution channels to banks—not competitors.
Google’s announced checking account isn’t designed to compete with banks’ checking accounts—it’s supposed to help the banks’ products. In addition, it has launched an AI tool to help banks analyze their PPP loans, and has ramped up cloud services for financial institutions.
Likewise, Amazon will make more money by providing technology services to help financial institutions find new customers—then open accounts and underwrite, process, and service loans.
Banks will gladly pay for this, because Amazon will do it for a lower cost than what banks incur to do it today.
Square may be a on a roll, but there are speed bumps. The shift to digital and contactless payments puts Square at a disadvantage. As The Motley Fool points out:
“PayPal's been working on in-store digital payments for years, while Square has focused on card payments, so Square has quite a bit of catching up to do.”
The article does go on to point out, however, that:
“Both fintech companies are working to encroach on each other's territories, but they're not playing a zero-sum game.”
And that’s the key point. A win for Square isn’t necessarily a loss for PayPal—but it is for banks.
Ron Shevlin is the Managing Director of Fintech Research at Cornerstone Advisors. Author of the book Smarter Bank and the Fintech Snark Tank on Forbes, Ron is ranked
Ron Shevlin is the Managing Director of Fintech Research at Cornerstone Advisors. Author of the book Smarter Bank and the Fintech Snark Tank on Forbes, Ron is ranked among the top fintech influencers globally, and is a frequent keynote speaker at banking and fintech industry events.
