Governments globally are keeping their eye on Bitcoin, which has acted as a hedge against unstable currencies. Bitcoin has gained particular prominence in Venezuela, Lebanon and Zimbabwe, all of which have experienced hyperinflation. The Russian government has also shown interest in Bitcoin, reportedly investing in Bitcoin-mining facilities in the north, while banning use for regular citizens.
Proponents of Bitcoin argue that it will replace money for the next generation. And this may well be true. But with the Federal Reserve issuing over $4 trillion in stimulus so far, and most recently initiating a $750 billion corporate bond buying program, Bitcoin seems like small potatoes to the American government. Even more concerning is that, given its current spending patterns, the Federal Reserve could simply buy up all available Bitcoin supply and eliminate any competition to the USD as the world reserve currency.
There are two potential futures for Bitcoin. The first is a small group of wealthy individuals (or governments) accumulate the majority of this digital asset, and decrease its significance. This is far-fetched, but possible, given some of the wealthiest individuals in the world, including Jeff Bezos, hold more wealth than the market cap of Bitcoin.
The second is governments go on a buying spree of Bitcoin, using it as a type of commodity to back its currency, similar to the gold standard. It is estimated that 45% of the world’s current gold supply is currently held in government vaults, with regular purchases made each year. A similar treatment of Bitcoin could drive up the price of Bitcoin to never-before seen levels, creating a new “Bitcoin Standard.”
Hi there and thanks for reading. If you stumble upon my articles, you will notice that I write about financial innovation, economy and technology.
Hi there and thanks for reading. If you stumble upon my articles, you will notice that I write about financial innovation, economy and technology.
I hold a JD/MBA and spent the formative years of my career in capital markets working across Mergers & Acquisitions, Derivative Products, Early-Stage Venture Capital, and Cryptocurrencies. I believe it is our duty to find solutions for the growing wealth divide and to create equality of opportunity for the next generation. You can tweet me @tatianakoffman .
