“This sort of gets the crypto people angry, but there are transactions that are not within the balance of the law,” said Musk. “And there are, obviously, many laws in different countries. And, normally, cash is used for these transactions. But, in order for illegal transactions to occur, cash must also be used for legal transactions. You need an illegal to legal bridge. That’s where crypto comes in.”
When asked if he was specifically referring to dark web activities, Musk responded, “It can’t be entirely dark because, otherwise, how do you buy normal stuff? And cash, these days, is used much rarer. It’s increasingly difficult to use cash. Some places, you can’t use cash at all. So, there’s a forcing function for transactions that are illegal, quasi-legal, and in some cases legal. But it’s got to have both legal and illegal.”
While Musk sees value in Bitcoin as a tool for payments that may not otherwise be allowed to occur, the Tesla CEO also sees a need for a bridge to exist between a crypto-driven black market and the legal economy.
Notably, a bill was introduced in Congress last week that could have a massive impact on the ability for Bitcoin to act as a legal, functional currency in the United States .
Although Musk sees utility in Bitcoin for its ability to enable more illegal transactions in a cashless society, he seemed to throw cold water on the idea that it will become some sort of global reserve currency of the world.
“Where I see crypto as is effectively a replacement for cash,” said Musk. “But not as a replacement for a primary — I do not see crypto being the primary database.”
In his final comment on the topic of Bitcoin, Musk clarified that he does not have some sort of moral objection to crypto.
“This is sometimes taken as being like I’m being judgmental about crypto, but it’s actually — there are a lot of things that are illegal that shouldn’t be illegal,” explained Musk. “I think sometimes governments have too many laws. They shouldn’t have so many things that are illegal.”
It should be noted that Musk has been rather consistent with his views on Bitcoin over the years, as he shared similar thoughts on the topic as far back as 2014 .
I created http://thecryptofeed.net, which is intended to be the front page of Bitcoin and online privacy news on the internet. I'm also a longtime Bitcoin writer who has
I created http://thecryptofeed.net, which is intended to be the front page of Bitcoin and online privacy news on the internet. I'm also a longtime Bitcoin writer who has worked all over the Bitcoin media space—from being editor-in-chief at Inside Bitcoins to contributing to Bitcoin Magazine on a regular basis. My work has also been featured in Business Insider, VICE Motherboard, Wired UK, and many other financial and tech media outlets. I'm mostly interested in the use of Bitcoin for transactions that would be censored by the traditional financial system (think darknet markets and ransomware) in addition to the use of bitcoin as an unseizable, digital store of value. Altcoins, appcoins, and ICOs don't make much sense to me. Find all of my work at kyletorpey.com. Disclosure: I hold some bitcoin.
