The general consensus is that the bitcoin price will rise.
The reason for this is that the inflation of the BTC money supply by 12.5 BTC every ten minutes, means that there is a new supply of 1,800 coins a day, let’s call it $14 million a day. This $14 million of new supply, which is currently absorbed by buyers, will suddenly be cut in half to $7 million. The demand, however, will remain roughly constant. Unchanged demand coupled with lower supply, equals price up.
This is how it has worked in the past and this is what I’m putting my money on. There are skeptics who suggest that if the price doesn’t move up then miners will wither away, block times will slow dramatically, bitcoin will be less useful, people will panic and dump and so on. However, there are a lot of people like me who would love that and would buy a lot into such a panic. Less supply, same demand, high price, wins the simple proven logical outcome of the next halvening.
But of course people are going to preempt.
To add to the price pressure, bitcoin gets lost. That happens to gold too and was also a problem for gold when it was money. That enables bitcoin to get ever more expensive overtime.
If a Satoshi was 1 cent, bitcoin’s market cap would be 21 trillion dollars, but when you think about it, if a Satoshi was $1 or $100, then it would become a currency much like gold, which in the past was used foremostly as a store of wealth, expressed in the usage for silver coins which acted as a store of wealth for the general usage of copper coins. This is the dream of all crypto fans, bitcoin as the reserve currency of crypto, an incredibly valuable blockchain fungibly linked on top of a hierarchy of other ‘lesser’ currencies.
The upcoming halvening speaks to this dream and it’s coming to the BTC blockchain in May. As a hodl’er I can wait.
Be among the first to get important crypto and blockchain news and information with Forbes Crypto Confidential. It's free, sign up now.
Clem Chambers is the CEO of private investors website ADVFN.com and author of Be Rich , The Game in Wall Street and Trading Cryptocurrencies: A Beginner’s Guide . In 2018, Chambers won Journalist of the Year in the Business Market Commentary category in the State Street U.K. Institutional Press Awards.
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I
I am the CEO of stocks and investment website ADVFN . As well as running Europe and South America’s leading financial market website I am a prolific financial writer. I wrote a stock column for WIRED – which described me as a ‘Market Maven’ - and am a regular columnist for numerous financial publications around the world. I have written for titles including:  Working Money, Active Trader, SFO and Technical Analysis of Stocks & Commodities in the US and have written for pretty much every UK national newspaper.  In the last few years I have become a financial thriller writer and have just had my first non-fiction title published: 101 ways to pick stock market winners. Find me here on US Amazon.
You’ll also see me regularly on CNBC, CNN, SKY, Business News Network and the BBC giving my take on the markets.
