According to the message received by users, LocalBitcoins now requires users in some countries to go through an "enhanced due diligence process," though LocalBitcoins has given no indication of what that process is or when details will be made clear.
Some reports have suggested the suspensions are a result of strict new European Union anti-money laundering regulations that came into effect this month, requiring bitcoin and cryptocurrency platforms and wallet providers to identify their customers.
However, LocalBitcoins, which has a reputation as being a relatively anonymous way for bitcoin users around the world to buy and sell bitcoin, claimed to have complied with the new legislation early last year, giving it ample time to verify users' identities ahead of the changes taking effect this month.
The regulatory changes have been blamed for bitcoin trading volumes on LocalBitcoins falling sharply in recent months, with reports suggesting bitcoin volume on the site fell by around 70% between September and November 2019.
In an interview last year, LocalBitcoins chief executive Sebastian Sonntag said the exchange was signing up between 4,000 and 5,000 new users per day but warned "changes" to the site have "had an impact on overall trade volume."
Meanwhile, other major bitcoin and crypto exchanges have been struggling with declining volumes over the last year, sparking fears the market could be on course for a correction .
The bitcoin price has climbed over the last 12-months but declining trade volumes have some worried. ... [+]
Last year , hackers stole around $28,000 worth of bitcoin from users' LocalBitcoins accounts.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
