Today there are 18,244,475 BTC in circulation and during the last few weeks, a number of bitcoin influencers have been talking about how much is needed to be included in Bitcoin’s top 1% of holders. For instance, according to Blockworks Group analyst Jake Levison, if you own 0.28 BTC “you’re statistically guaranteed to be in the richest 1% of the world in BTC terms.” Regardless of the amount of BTC required to qualify as a one-percenter, it’s a debate that has raged on for years.
On February 18, Blockworks Group analyst Jake Levison tweeted about what it takes to make it into the top 1% of bitcoin holders worldwide. “If you own 0.28 BTC , you’re statistically guaranteed to be in the richest 1% of the world in BTC terms,” explained Levison. Despite the fact that the tweet received 1.5K likes, not everyone agreed with Levison’s estimate. “Maybe earlier, in 2030, average holdings are only 0.01 BTC , assuming 1 billion using the network,” Twitter user @Haggsboson replied . The 2030 assumption came from the recent study written by Unchained Capital’s Parker Lewis called “Bitcoin Obsoletes All Other Money.” Levison’s opinion is not really new either as others have assumed that 0.28 BTC gets you into the richest 1% of bitcoin owners.
Former Google Product Director Steve Lee said the same thing in October 2018. “If you own 0.28 BTC and HODL, you can be certain no more than 1% of the current world’s population can ever own more BTC than you. A modest investment of $1,830 today can ensure you are a 1%er in a future Bitcoin world,” Lee tweeted . Not too many people disagreed with Lee’s statement in 2018 but one replied: “That’s true but you have to factor in that not all wealth will be in BTC . You might be in the 1% top BTC balances but not in the top 1% wealth.” So the average bitcoiner in the eyes of some holds around 0.01 BTC and a few people agree that 0.28 BTC gets you into the Bitcoin 1% club.
An illustrative view of the “average bitcoin per user” from the recent study written by Unchained Capital’s Parker Lewis.
15 BTC to Join the Club: Modeling Bitcoin Distribution by Disregarding Analyzed Wallets and Addresses
But even these two estimates from Lee and Levison might be too low, as research suggests that 15 BTC is the minimum needed to join BTC ’s 1%. A chart published in 2017 estimates that the top 1% of bitcoin holders need at least 15 BTC and 89 BTC to make the top 0.1%. According to the Blocklink.info chart , there are 225,000 people within the top 1% percentile. A similar study was published by Bambouclub on September 9, 2017, and both reports leverage a new model of BTC distribution. Bambouclub and the Blocklink.info studies model BTC ’s distribution using a scheme that “disregards wallet and address data entirely.” The model’s assumptions include:
Power law applies to distribution of bitcoin wealth.
Distribution of bitcoin wealth exactly mirrors that of global wealth.
A study published by Bambouclub on September 9, 2017. This chart shows you need more than 0.28 BTC to make the 1% club as Blocklink.info chart shows it takes 15 BTC to make the Bitcoin 1%. It takes over 7,000 BTC to make the 0.001% of the wealthiest bitcoin holders.
In order to make the 0.01%, Blocklink.info’s chart shows you need 433 BTC and to make the highest order of bitcoin holders (0.001%), you would need 7,021 BTC . The study assumes only 500 people are in the 0.01% and just 250 people are in the 0.001% in 2017. However, it’s hard to get more accurate estimates in regard to the wealthiest bitcoiners because no one truly knows the number of people worldwide who own even a small fraction of BTC . Moreover, there’s a great number of lost bitcoins and in January 2020 it was estimated that more than 10 million BTC have been sitting dormant for a whole year. The 10.7 million BTC lost is part of the largest number of coins that haven’t moved since the spring months of 2017.
This image from Unchained Capital’s research on April 17, 2018, shows UTXO age distribution with price peaks labeled. The white lines are ‘Hodl Waves’ which starts a new aging period. On January 13, 2020, news.Bitcoin.com reported on how close to 11 million BTC hasn’t moved in over a year.
From Lost Bitcoins to the Number of True Owners, Bitcoin’s Adoption Metrics Have a Few Unknowns
The number of BTC needed to get into the top 1% is roughly between 0.28 BTC to 15 BTC depending on the person you ask or the study referenced to get that calculation. Steve Lee’s 2018 estimate assumes that there will only be 21 million bitcoins and this is divided by 0.28 and then again divided by the number of people living on earth, which is 7.7 billion people as of April 2019. Jake Levison backed up his statement when someone asked him when 0.28 BTC will get you into BTC ’s 1% club. “From now until the end of time,” Levison tweeted . The Blockworks Group analyst added:
My tweet was saying that if you own 0.28 BTC , only 1% of the world will ever be able to own more than you. Hence putting you in the top 1%.
There will never be more than 21 million bitcoin issued. Many speculators over the years have tried to guess what it takes to make the bitcoin one-percenters club. Estimates vary because of uncertainties like the number of bitcoin owners globally.
The answer to the BTC 1% club question is quite debatable and there are a few different calculations. The reason for this is the number of unknowns that cannot be calculated in a precise fashion such as the exact number of BTC holders, the approximate number of lost and stolen coins, and the number of wallets worldwide. Moreover, there’s a lot of skewed data online that attempts to estimate the number of bitcoin owners in different countries and worldwide. For instance, according to a survey and research report written by Spencer Bogart of the venture capital firm Blockchain Capital, “9% of the [American] population owns bitcoin.”
A report published on January 7, 2020, by the digital currency company Decentralised.co which shows the number of BTC addresses has increased year after year. However, Bambouclub’s study on September 9, 2017, notes that “models of the distribution of bitcoin wealth that analyze wallets and address data will always fail.”
“Including 18% of those aged 18–34 and 12% of those aged 35–44,” Bogart wrote on April 30, 2019. However, a big discrepancy with Bogart’s estimate is the fact that the study only surveyed 2,052 American adults rather than the 209 million adults who are currently 18 years of age and over. We can try to come close to answering the speculative 1% question, but just like measuring the world’s richest gold holders, we can only guess the number of BTC held by individuals worldwide.
What do you think about the estimates for making it into the BTC 1% club? Do you think it’s 0.28 BTC or more than that like the 15 BTC estimate from Blocklink.info’s report? Let us know what you think about this subject in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any ideas, software, mining rigs, mining rig manufacturers, websites, concepts, content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Image credits: Shutterstock, Reddit , 21 Million Bitcoin Club , Decentralised.co, Unchained Capital, Twitter, Franck Muller Encrypto, Fair Use, Wiki Commons, Parker Lewis , and Pixabay.
Are you looking for a secure way to buy Bitcoin online? Start by downloading your free Bitcoin wallet from us and then head over to our Purchase Bitcoin page where you can easily buy BTC and BCH .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
