Bitcoin, the world's most valuable cryptocurrency by a wide margin, is treading water after rallying hard since its March crash.
Now, as a number of smaller cryptocurrencies and bitcoin rivals make big gains, one tiny token has soared over 1,000% since its March lows.
As the bitcoin price treads water, a number of smaller cryptocurrencies have been outpacing bitcoin ... [+] over recent weeks.
Theta, the primary cryptocurrency token of the Theta decentralized video streaming network, has added over 1,000% to its price since the bitcoin and wider cryptocurrency market crashed in March, according to CoinMarketCap data.
The theta mega-rally comes as rumors swirl the San Francisco-based Theta Labs is poised to announce a partnership with YouTube-owner Google on Wednesday, May 27.
Theta Labs did not respond to a request for comment.
A partnership with search giant Google, which recently launched the cloud gaming service Stadia, could be seen as an endorsement of Theta Labs' decentralized video infrastructure and business model.
Earlier this month, it was revealed Theta.tv will be included on future Samsung Galaxy phones with the software expected to be added to some 75 million existing devices.
"Our groundbreaking approach to streaming is a perfect fit for Samsung’s worldwide user base," Theta Labs co-founder and chief executive Mitch Liu said at the time.
The theta token has surged an eye-watering 306% in the last month, eclipsing bitcoin's 17% gains.
Meanwhile, the world's largest bitcoin and cryptocurrency exchange Binance has revealed it will support Theta’s upcoming mainnet upgrade. Binance also announced today it will launch a theta-U.S. dollar perpetual trading contract with up to 50-times leverage.
Similar bitcoin and crypto exchange announcements of support have boosted smaller cryptocurrencies in recent weeks , indicating the market is desperate for clearer direction.
Some bitcoin and cryptocurrency watchers have suggested a broader rally in small capitalization cryptocurrencies, including the likes of theta, could mean these tokens are "decoupling from the rest of the market."
"The small caps index is now up more than 15% so far in May, while the other indexes are struggling to even be in the green this month," analysts at London-based bitcoin and crypto exchange Luno wrote in a weekly update.
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
