Travala, the online platform that allows crypto users to book hotel rooms in thousands of destinations around the world, has registered remarkable growth in bookings during the Christmas holiday season. More than half of those in December were paid in cryptocurrency, with bitcoin cash among the preferred options.
Rooms booked via the Travala.com website have been steadily rising throughout 2019, crossing another milestone last month, the travel agency announced in its most recent monthly report. The total number reached 1,528 in December, which represents a more than 15% increase over November, when 1,326 room nights were booked. The overall booking revenue was up 33.5% month-on-month, the document details. Besides the increase in bookings, the average price per room night also went up – from $97 in October and $115 in November to $133 in the last month of 2019, when the bookings peaked.
The report also shows that more than 60% of all Travala bookings in December were paid using cryptocurrencies, with bitcoin core ( BTC ) topping the list with 28%, followed by the platform’s native AVA token with over 9%. Bitcoin cash ( BCH ) is a close third with 8% of all bookings. Ethereum ( ETH ) accounts for 4% and Binance coin and dash each have 3%. Monero ( XMR ) was used in 2% of the cases, while the total of payments with other cryptocurrencies amounted to 6%. Fiat transactions with credit cards and Paypal had a 37% share.
Travala’s crypto payment gateway accepts multiple cryptocurrencies, also including XRP , LTC , TRX , NAN, XRB, ADA , DAI, and TUSD, allowing crypto enthusiasts to pay for its services with their favorite digital coin. The platform’s AVA token, based on the NEO network, is used to fuel its Smart discount and loyalty program which provides up to 10% savings on hotel and other accommodation bookings for users of the Travala.com wallet. A total of 2,305,000 AVA, close to 5% of the circulating supply, is locked within the Smart program which already has 550 members.
Travala.com currently offers customers the opportunity to book rooms in over 2,000,000 hotels and accommodations worldwide, including luxury resorts, apartments, villas, and hostels. According to its December report, the top seven visitors by country were from the Unites States, the U.K., Italy, Germany, France, Poland, and Australia. The leading seven destinations by bookings were Thailand, Cambodia, U.S., Australia, Italy, Vietnam, and France.
In November, Travala announced a new partnership with the popular online portal Booking.com, adding 90,000 destinations in over 230 countries, as news.Bitcoin.com reported . The cooperation made Travala one of the largest online travel agencies with global reach by number of bookable hotels. Travala.com is also a partner of Bitcoin.com. The platform is now integrated in the Bitcoin.com Wallet which has more than 5 million downloads so far. Its users can book accommodation for their trips with bitcoin cash.
Moving into 2020, Travala plans to focus on growing its user base and improving the user experience. Further enhancement of the AVA token utility, onboarding more travel businesses into its B2B platform, and expanding the partner network are among the top priorities stated in the company’s roadmap for the first quarter of this year. Travel.com also plans to add a number of new payment methods including cryptocurrency and local payment options.
Have you used the services of Travala or other crypto-accepting travel agencies? Share your experience in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: This article is for informational purposes only. It is not an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any third party products, services, or companies. Bitcoin.com does not provide investment, tax, legal, or accounting advice. Neither the company nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Do you need a reliable bitcoin mobile wallet to send, receive, and store your coins? Download one for free from us and then head to our Purchase Bitcoin page where you can quickly buy bitcoin with a credit card.
Purchase Bitcoin without visiting a cryptocurrency exchange. Buy BTC and BCH here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
