Given that they had only been open for trading for a few months, neither Bakkt nor ErisX have the level of volumes that unregulated offshore exchanges report. At present, unregulated venues including BitMEX, OKEx, Huobi and Binance lead the crypto derivatives market.
In 2018, Big Four accounting firm KPMG detailed in a report that institutionalization is the next key step for cryptoassets to “realize their potential.” The researchers suggested that the trading of derivatives is one of the areas that traditional financial institutions have to take the lead.
The world’s largest derivatives exchange The CME Group along with competitor CBOE Global Markets had been involved in the market since December 2017, when the two firms started listing bitcoin futures. , the unregulated venues continue to attract clients.
In March 2019, CBOE stopped adding new bitcoin futures , saying at the time that it was “accessing its approach” for how to continue offering crypto derivatives products. CBOE has yet to resume listing bitcoin futures.
The entry of Bakkt and ErisX now raises the question of if 2020 is the year we’ll begin to see traditional regulated exchanges take the lead.
For the record, what makes an exchange unregulated is the fact that it launches the trading of financial products without going through the process of first securing a regulatory approval. This appears to be an advantage for these exchanges because they’re able to take user feedback and convert them into products or features faster than their regulated counterparts.
Recall that it took Bakkt about a year to secure regulatory approve to list its physically delivered bitcoin futures product.
One of the benefits of the straight-to-market approach of unregulated exchanges is apparent in how they’ve designed a new type of futures dubbed perpetual swaps. They call it perpetual because, unlike traditional futures contract, it doesn’t have an expiry date. They’ve also engineered it such that it trades close to the spot price of the underlying cryptocurrency through what they call “ funding payments .”
In addition, to cope with the growing competition and to continue being attractive to traders, at least the retail crowd, unregulated exchanges are likely to launch new derivative products for varying cryptoassets, according to Simon Peters, a cryptocurrency analyst at multi-asset brokerage firm eToro.
Binance recently lunched the trading of Ripple and EOS perpetual contracts on its exchange. FTX, a derivatives exchange in which Binance recently invested , have also launched bitcoin options.
In November 2019, the bitcoin market witnessed a sell-off, with the spot price for the biggest cryptocurrency by market capitalization dropping as low as $6,945, down from the $9,000 region at the beginning of the month.
While the spot market was dealing with a sell-off, the regulated exchanges based in the U.S., namely CME and Bakkt, saw a spike in volume for their crypto derivative offerings. During this period, Bakkt recorded a new all-time high volume.
The significance of this is in how institutional sentiment is might influence the retail-driven spot market. Institutional investors, given their robust access to information, are able to make deeply educated trade decision, which is likely to sway trading among retail investors. And since most unregulated derivatives exchanges use spot prices as a benchmark, institutional sentiments could be an important part of how people trade derivatives on unregulated exchanges.
Could Transparency Issues See Unregulated Exchanges Lose Users?
Crypto exchanges have had their fair share of criticism regarding transparency, or the lack thereof. The aforementioned engineering that allows perpetual futures derive their value from the spot market has made crypto exchanges become a victim of their own innovation.
Derivatives are fast becoming the largest driver of volumes for exchanges, with Binance recently claiming that futures now account for roughly 75% of its total bitcoin volume.
That makes the spot market susceptible to price manipulations for profit in the futures market. Price manipulations can lead to flash crashes, events that see the price of an asset drop sharply within a short period. Flash crashes, in turn, can decide winners and losers in the futures market. That’s already a discouraging prospect, but it gets worse.
“Lack of certainty is clearly an issue. Not only are unregulated exchanges more prone to mass defaults (on account of extreme leverage), but it is not always clear how they will respond,” Peters said.
The crypto market is littered with high profile flash crash events and a common outcome has involved highly leveraged traders defaulting. In the traditional financial market, exchanges have multi-level protection measures to deal with default. These measures are usually outlined in an exchange’s rulebook. At the minimum, the defaulting trader has the obligation to pay up the owed amount.
Crypto exchanges do not require the losing leveraged trader to pay back. The trader only loses all of their collateral. Instead, they set up an insurance fund to cover defaults. In situations where the insurance fund balance isn’t large enough to cover the loss, the exchange basically have other traders pay for it through one of two mechanisms that they designed — socialized loss or auto deleveraging.
Many traders who have suffered some loss through these measures have lamented about the lack of transparency in these processes.
“Take Deribit’s insurance scheme, for example, which is designed to prevent margin traders having a negative balance following liquidations,” Peters added “The enough scheme is easy to understand, but Deribit themselves are not certain it is the best solution.”
“They recently reimbursed traders using company funds, not the insurance scheme, and published a detailed blog post in which they remained open to the possibility of trade rollbacks. So, even with schemes like this in place, the way in which unregulated exchanges handle defaults is far from set in stone.”
Here are some recent issues related to how unregulated exchanges handle defaulting. In April 2019, a sudden rise in the price of bitcoin led to the automatic liquidation of around $500 million worth of short positions on BitMEX. In August, a flash crash of a lesser known crypto coin CLAM led to a socialized loss of 1,800 bitcoins. Also in August, Malta-based OKEx also said it would socialize the loss of over $400 million.
These transparency issues may haunt the unregulated exchanges, causing them to lose clients to regulated exchanges, where robust traditional security measures are employed. The regulated venues have rulebooks that clearly define how they handle defaults. A trader won’t have to cover the loss of another trader.
"When looking at regulated vs. unregulated entities, one thing to keep in mind is that regulation isn't just a word to throw around to sound sophisticated, like saying "institutional grade" without defining what it means. Regulation has actual meaning and requirements, core principles, proven infrastructure as well as industry standards, all working together to protect the investor and market integrity," Thomas Chippas, CEO of ErisX told me in an email.
Bakkt did not respond to a request for comment.
Unregulated crypto exchanges are confident they'll continue to lead the derivatives market with ... [+] innovative products.
Derivative exchanges including Malta-based Binance, Singapore-based Bybit and Netherlands-based Deribit all believe they will continue to grow in 2020, largely because of certain built-in advantages they claim to have over the U.S. based regulated exchanges.
Other exchanges including BitMEX, OKEx and FTX did not respond to a request for comments.
Head of Futures at Binance Aaron Gong said offshore crypto exchanges differ from regulated trading venues in product design and client segments.
“Traditional exchanges have an established infrastructure and existing institutional client base. However, unlike the new exchanges, they don’t operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week,” said Gong in an email. “Moreover, the new exchanges are closer to the crypto community and continue to innovate the products based on the feedback.”
Gong pointed at the how Binance raised maximum leverage on its futures products to 125x from the original 20x based on user requests.
Bybit CEO Ben Zhou believes the competition that Bakkt and ErisX bring will be good for the crypto market in the long haul, insisting that it will put unregulated exchanges on their foot to continue improving their trading environment. He added that Bybit is open to obtaining licenses to operate when one becomes available.
“In the coming years, it is certainly feasible that more regulation might come about as more countries offer licenses on crypto derivatives, Zhou said. “Bybit will embrace regulation and gain the proper license to enter that market when there is an option to do so.”
For now, Zhou believes that the higher leverage that unregulated exchanges offer combined with good trading experience — order execution efficiency, customer support and liquidity — will continue drive retail clients’ preferences for unregulated exchange .
Deribit expects the competition from the new entrants to boost global volumes, but insists that the entry of Bakkts and other regulated venues is unlikely to affects its market. The exchange also believes its focus on crypto options make its business more robust compared it its peers.
“We were the first to launch and still have slightly less than 90% of all outstanding open interested in listed BTC options. This includes Ledger X and Bakkt from the US and OKEx from China,” Luuk Strijers, Chief commercial officer at Deribit said.
Just before U.S. lawmakers went into recess for the holidays in December, a new bill dubbed the “ Crypto-Currency Act of 2020 ” surfaced. The bill seeks spell out which agency in the country regulate cryptoassets. Going by this development, global regulatory developments would be critical more than ever. Peters believes this might also influence where traders choose to trade this year.
"In summary, I see both regulated and unregulated venues growing over 2020, as both attract a different client demographic. What will be interesting, however, is when regulation comes in this year and how onerous it will be. This could affect trading behavior,” Peters said. “If tight KYC and AML procedures are introduced, it may act as a deterrent to the retail clients who are unwilling to provide this level of information from using the venues they currently do."
An example of this would be Deribit’s decision to move its operations from the Netherlands to Panama, escape the implications of the EU's 5th Anti-Money Laundering Directive (5AMLD). The Dutch government is expected to implement the stricter AML rules this year and it could affect crypto companies.
