"It’s likely that speculators are already starting to jump in [to bitcoin] because they feel a big buy order may be coming," said Simon Peters, bitcoin and crypto analyst at brokerage eToro.
The top ten bitcoin and crypto exchanges around the world have around $350 million of liquidity on their books, according to the Coinmarketcap liquidity index and Peters thinks that if the entire $120 million of new tether went into the crypto markets, it "could move prices significantly."
"It will be interesting to see if demand continues to increase over the days to come and whether we start seeing some more prominent higher highs and higher lows in price action. This would give me more confidence that a recovery is on the cards," Peters said, adding "we’re not out of the woods yet."
Meanwhile, a Twitter bot that tracks major bitcoin and cryptocurrency trades, Whale Alert, has shown a number of large bitcoin transactions moving off exchanges to unknown wallets in the last 24-hours, suggesting some big investors have already taken advantage of the low bitcoin prices to buy more.
The bitcoin price has rallied hard over the last two days, adding a whopping 26% and nearing $7,000 ... [+] per bitcoin.
Bitcoin's rebound yesterday came ahead of a broader recovery in traditional markets after a global sell-off last week due to the spreading coronavirus.
Global stocks and the price of oil have climbed today, suggesting a growing raft of central bank-led stimulus has finally satisfied investors and restored some semblance of market confidence.
However, countries and major cities around the world are increasingly going into shut down as governments desperately try to minimize the impact of COVID-19.
Some analysts have warned this market rebound could be what's known as a "dead cat bounce" and markets, possibly including bitcoin and crypto, could soon fall back again.
"Right now, most people are shell-shocked—they’re still in the denial phase. I believe we are primed for a powerful bull trap very soon [especially] with all these stimulus announcements. The market will probably bounce hard, which will suck in all the dumb money ... Once investors get complacent and cocky again after a sharp market rebound, that sets the stage for the rug to be pulled out from under them, which will lead to an even more powerful crash than the first one."
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported
I am a journalist with significant experience covering technology, finance, economics, and business around the world. As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle. I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself. I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others. Follow me on Twitter @billybambrough or email me on billyATbillybambrough.com.
Disclosure: I occasionally hold some small amount of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.
