The race to launch regulated physically-delivered bitcoin futures is back on for three US-regulated trading platforms after one of them hit a snag with the country’s derivatives regulator, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Two other exchanges are racing to launch similar products this year.
Three regulated trading platforms in the U.S. are vying to become the first to launch physically-delivered bitcoin futures. One of them almost reached the finish line ahead of the other two when the media reported last week that Ledgerx had launched physically-settled bitcoin futures. However, the company subsequently admitted that it has not been approved to offer this product.
Ledgerx CEO Paul Chou clarified on Aug. 6 that the news that his company was “live with trading futures for retail” was “incorrectly announced.”
Ledgerx has been working to obtain approval from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) to launch physically-settled bitcoin futures for many years. The company has been granted three different designations: a Swap Execution Facility (SEF) on July 6, 2017; a Derivatives Clearing Organization (DCO) on July 24, 2017; and a Designated Contract Market (DCM) in June this year.
The CFTC website states that “A DCO that seeks to provide clearing services with respect to futures contracts, options on futures contracts, or swaps must register with the CFTC before it can begin providing such services.” The agency confirmed on July 24:
Ledgerx has requested that the CFTC amend its order of registration as a DCO, which limits Ledgerx to clearing swaps, to allow it to clear futures listed on its DCM.
The newly obtained DCM license “allows Ledgerx to launch a retail trading platform for swaps and options.” The company launched its Omni trading platform on Aug. 1. “Omni is now live with trading, we have on-boarded real retail customers who have executed real trades with real funds,” the CEO shared.
Chou clarified that Ledgerx’s current licenses only allow it to “clear swaps and options,” adding that Ledgerx has “formally requested that the CFTC add futures to our DCO license we received in 2017.” He confirmed, “We are still awaiting this amendment.”
Following media reports, Chou explained that the erroneous futures launch announcement was “Due to miscommunication around a single word between a principal, a PR team member, and one of our most valued publication relationships.” He tweeted that the “CFTC asked us to censor our tweets. We did. But never again, this is a disaster to democracy,” adding:
I’ve decided to sue the CFTC for anti-competitive behavior, breach of duty, going against the regs, etc … if the government does not do the right thing, we will sue them, period. Already talking to our lawyers.
Claiming to “have recordings for this type of thing,” Chou wrote, “I am going to release all of them on twitter until the government does their fucking job.”
Ledgerx launched its institutional trading platform in October 2017. “We launched a virtual trading pit, got approval for a BTC halving contract, and achieved our first months of profitability as a company,” the CEO detailed. As a SEF, Ledgerx “could legally only service what the CFTC calls Eligible Contract Participants (ECPs),” Chou emphasized. “Think accredited investor but even stricter. For example, individuals would need a net worth greater than $5mm if they wanted to ‘hedge’ risk on the platform, $10mm if they wanted to do ‘speculative’ trading.”
Another trading platform recently approved by the CFTC for physically-delivered bitcoin futures is TD Ameritrade-backed Erisx. The CFTC has approved its license to operate a DCO “for futures on physically-delivered digital assets,” the company said on July 1, adding that this approval supplements its DCM license obtained in 2011.
“Under the DCO order, Eris will be authorized to provide clearing services for fully-collateralized virtual currency futures. Eris’ indirect parent company, Eris Exchange Llc, is registered with the CFTC as a designated contract market,” the agency confirmed. Furthermore, the derivatives regulator’s Division of Clearing and Risk has issued a letter granting Eris no-action relief from complying with certain CFTC regulations due to the company’s fully-collateralized clearing model.
Erisx futures will be offered through Eris Exchange Llc (CFTC-registered DCM) and Eris Clearing Llc (CFTC-registered DCO). The company detailed:
As a registered DCO, the Erisx clearinghouse will offer the clearing of digital asset futures contracts traded on Erisx’s regulated derivatives market, which will launch later this year.
Laurian Cristea, General Counsel at Erisx, commented that “Obtaining the DCO license is the second key enterprise goal we achieved this year, after launching our spot market.”
A major player trying to offer a similar product is Bakkt, a company formed by Intercontinental Exchange Inc. (ICE) “with the goal of establishing a global platform for digital assets,” according to the company’s Form 8-K filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). ICE is a Fortune 500 company which owns and operates 12 regulated exchanges and marketplaces, spanning 9 asset classes, including the New York Stock Exchange and ICE futures exchanges in the U.S. and Europe.
The company plans to offer physically-delivered bitcoin futures as one of its first offerings. Bakkt’s website states:
We’re partnering with ICE’s leading futures exchange and clearing infrastructure to bring physical delivery futures contracts to market participants in more than 30 countries … A launch date is expected in the second half of 2019.
Bakkt plans to launch bitcoin daily and monthly futures which will be compliant with CFTC’s requirements, ICE Futures U.S. (CFTC-regulated DCM), and ICE Clear U.S. (CFTC-regulated DCO). Last month, Bakkt began testing its platform for bitcoin futures listed and traded at ICE Futures U.S. and cleared at ICE Clear US, COO Adam White announced. The company tweeted on July 22: “Today kicks off user acceptance testing … for the Bakkt Bitcoin Daily & Monthly Futures contracts … Testing is proceeding as planned with participants from around the world.” The company noted that “Participants will undergo applicable AML/KYC reviews, consistent with CFTC-regulated markets and connect via ICE’s existing infrastructure.”
In addition, Bakkt explained that it has filed with the New York State Department of Financial Services (NYDFS) “for approval to form a limited-purpose trust company that would serve as a qualified custodian of bitcoin under applicable law.” Its website details:
The launch will follow UAT [user acceptance testing] and Bakkt’s receipt of regulatory approval from NYDFS.
Which platform do you think will launch physically-delivered bitcoin futures first? Let us know in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: Bitcoin.com does not endorse or support claims made by any parties in this article. None of the information in this article is intended as investment advice, as an offer or solicitation of an offer to buy or sell, or as a recommendation, endorsement, or sponsorship of any products, services, or companies. Neither Bitcoin.com nor the author is responsible, directly or indirectly, for any damage or loss caused or alleged to be caused by or in connection with the use of or reliance on any content, goods or services mentioned in this article.
Did you know you can buy and sell BCH privately using our noncustodial, peer-to-peer Local Bitcoin Cash trading platform? The Local.Bitcoin.com marketplace has thousands of participants from all around the world trading BCH right now. And if you need a bitcoin wallet to securely store your coins, you can download one from us here .
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
