Berkshire Hathaway CEO Warren Buffett.
Many Berkshire Hathaway investors would like the conglomerate to buy back more stock, but not enough of them are willing to sell large chunks of shares, according to CEO Warren Buffett.
“It’s very hard to buy blocks in the market,” Buffett said in a wide-ranging CNBC interview that included an endorsement of Apple stock (ticker: AAPL) and touched on Monday’s market sell-off, among other issues. “It’s held by people that really plan to keep it,” Buffett said of Berkshire shares (BRK.B).
The stock is less liquid than the shares of many big companies due to the presence of many long-term holders. Some have owned the stock for decades, capturing spectacular returns, but Buffett also reiterated Monday that the conglomerate’s vast size means it isn’t likely to beat the market by much in coming years.
Berkshire last year bought back nearly $5 billion of stock under expanded authority that Buffett and vice chairman Charlie Munger received in 2018. The 2019 purchases were more than the $1.4 billion in 2018, but accounted for less than 1% of Berkshire shares outstanding. Some Berkshire fans would like to see repurchases of 2% to 3%.
Buffett wrote in his annual shareholder letter , released on Saturday, that the Berkshire “price/value equation was modestly favorable at times” during 2019. That was hardly the ringing endorsement of the stock that some Berkshire fans had hoped to see.
Buffett noted in the letter that potential sellers of $20 million or more of Berkshire stock should contact the company “only if you are ready to sell.” The advertisement for potential sellers reflects the difficulty that Berkshire faces in repurchasing large blocks of stock. Buffett said that Berkshire would consider buying such blocks if Berkshire is in the market buying stock.
Separately, Buffett said that a Berkshire purchase of 2% of Kroger stock, made by the conglomerate during the fourth quarter, was
a call by one of his investment lieutenants, and not by him. The recent disclosure of the purchase helped lift Kroger shares.
“Kroger is doing a good job but it’s in a tough business,” Buffett said, noting the presence of Amazon.com (AMZN), Costco Wholesale (COST) and Walmart (WMT) in the industry.
Buffett said the Kroger purchase came from “one of our managers,” either Todd Combs or Ted Weschler, who each run about $15 billion of Berkshire’s equity portfolio totaling about $250 billion. He didn’t say which manager bought the stock.
On Apple, Buffett said the maker of the iPhone is “an incredible company and I should have appreciated it earlier.” Berkshire accumulated the bulk of its holding from 2016 to 2018 and now owns more than 5% of Apple, a holding that is worth over $75 billion. Berkshire has doubled its money in Apple so far, making it one of the company’s best investments ever.
He called it a “consumer products company that uses technology,” selling an “incredibly useful product,” the smartphone, that is vital to hundreds of millions of people. Buffett, long a technophobe, said he now owns a new Apple smart phone and has given up his old flip phone. He didn’t mention the Apple model he owns.
Buffett isn’t enamored of Treasuries, arguing that yields are too low relative to inflation. Buffett said it “makes no sense” for investors to lend money to the federal government at 1.4% for 10 years “when the government policy is to have 2% inflation.” He added that “you give them money at 1.4%, they tax you on it (the interest income) and devalue that money at 2%.”
Buffett added that the 10-year Treasury amounts to a “stock trading for 70 times earnings” whose earnings won’t go up for 10 years. (A stock trading for 20 times earnings would have an earnings yield of 5%, so a yield of 1.4% is equivalent to a price/earnings multiple of 70.)
He sees no appeal in such an investment proposition, and Berkshire holds relatively few bonds. It had less than $19 billion at year-end 2019, compared with $128 billion of cash and equivalents and $250 billion or so of stocks. Much of Berkshire’s bond portfolio is from overseas issuers.
Buffett said that he and Munger are mystified by the $13 trillion of negative-yielding debt in the world, much of it in Europe and Japan. “We do not understand at all what the outcome will be when there is $13 trillion borrowed at less than zero.”
He is also puzzled by the huge federal deficit, now running at 4.5% of gross domestic product “and no one is concerned in the least.”
Buffett said his negative views on bitcoin haven’t changed following a lunch with a crypto-currency enthusiast who paid $4.6 million to a charity last year for the opportunity.
“Crypto-currencies basically have no value and don’t produce anything,” Buffett said. ‘You have to hope that somebody pays you more for it later.” He added that he owns no crypto-currencies and “never will.” He joked that he might start a “Warren” currency and issue 21 million of them, like bitcoin.
Buffett said he isn’t fazed by the coronavirus and the market selloff on Monday. “It makes no difference on our investments,” he said. “There’s always some good news and bad news.”
Buffett didn’t say whether Berkshire is in the market buying stocks, but added “we’re certainly more inclined to buy stocks today than Friday.”
In a final key point, Buffett said Berkshire’s edge over the S&P 500 will be “minor” in the future given the company’s huge size. The  company is valued at about $540 billion and ranks sixth in the U.S. stock market.
He emphasized the company’s safety, given its strong balance sheet and diversified earnings base. Berkshire earned $24 billion after taxes from operations in 2019.
Berkshire stock has trailed the S&P 500 over the past one, five and 10 years. That has led to some frustration among Berkshire investors.
Buffett noted that Berkshire has the highest net worth of any company in the world. “I feel good about the fact that 99% of my money’s in it and that it will be the source of all the philanthropic contributions that are made for 15 or a dozen years after I die. So—but I don’t think—I do not think it will be in the top 10% of stocks performing over the next 10 years. I don’t think it’ll be in the top 15% of stocks performing in the next 10 or 15 years. I also don’t think it’ll be in the bottom 10% or 20% or 30%. So, but our ability to have a huge edge over the market generally with a $550 billion market value, it’s just, it’ll be minor, but it’ll be done in a very, very safe manner,” Buffett said.
Many Berkshire Hathaway investors would like the conglomerate to buy back more stock, but not enough of them are willing to sell large chunks of shares, according to CEO Warren Buffett.
