When Bitcoin Overtakes Gold - How High Can It Go?
Flashy bitcoin price speculation is a favorite game of crypto Twitter news outlets and commentators all over. After all, who doesn’t want to hear that their modest stash of satoshis could someday moon and be worth millions? Sensation aside, there remains a well-grounded case for continued rise in price where top cryptos are concerned, and should bitcoin’s market cap overtake that of gold — an asset limited in many ways compared to crypto — prices could indeed be out of this world.
Gold’s global market cap currently sits at around $8 trillion. Last year, at this time the precious metal’s capitalization sat closer to $7 trillion. As fiat paper worldwide continues to be devalued by governments and their reckless economic policies, many goldbugs see the upward trend continuing, and they may be right. Habitual bitcoin detractor and well-known gold enthusiast Peter Schiff has made a name for himself in making such predictions . What’s not talked about as often in precious metals circles are the very real physical limitations that come with the beautiful asset in regard to its function as money.
While Schiff’s frequent criticism of the U.S. Federal Reserve is well-received by many in the crypto space, his attacks on bitcoin and the views of crypto influencers and innovators such as Bobby Lee are generally not. Lee, CEO and founder of the Ballet Crypto physical crypto wallet and brother of Litecoin creator Charlie Lee, recently predicted that “the #flippening will happen within 9 years and $ BTC will shoot up past USD $500,000.”
#Gold is at about $8 trillion today, which is 50x the worth of #Bitcoin .
I predict the #flippening will happen within 9 years and $BTC will shoot up past USD $500,000.
And with all of the money printing that’s happening globally, $BTC will actually very likely be over $1 million! https://t.co/hbqGze38k5
— Bobby Lee – Ballet: Simple & Elegant Wallet (@bobbyclee) November 10, 2019
Like Schiff, Lee cites irresponsible economic policies as a contributing factor to the rise of his favored asset class. Unlike Schiff, however, Lee doesn’t view crypto as “fool’s gold” people should run from. Indeed, one of the main perceived strengths of bitcoin and crypto is that unlike gold, it has an extreme advantage in ease of transfer and portability. It’s no small feat for someone out of country to send a couple bars of gold to family back home. It’s heavy, significant fees will be charged, and applicable state regulations must be cleared. Crypto, on the other hand, has the ability to be sent for negligible fees instantly, without “necessary” or built-in interference from a third party or regulator.
Charlie puts BTC at a possible $500,000 in nine years. Notably, a recent statement from Bitcoin.com Executive Chairman Roger Ver, made in conjunction with a unique Facebook giveaway , suggested that BCH could also achieve new heights:
If I’m already friends with you on Facebook, post your Bitcoin Cash address and I will send you $5 worth of Bitcoin Cash that could easily become worth $5,000 some day. If I’m not already friends with you on Facebook, post your Bitcoin Cash address anyhow, and I will still send you $1 that could easily become $1,000 some day.
So what would prices look like if bitcoin did overtake gold in market cap? Well, as price is ultimately the product of myriad market variables and ever-changing economic context, such predictions are not easy to make in spite of how often they’re put out there. Still, basic calculations via market capitalization can be done assuming things don’t change too drastically much regarding current applicable factors.
If, for example, one of the top coins flipped gold’s current market cap of ~$8 trillion, the resultant price would be impressive. With a circulating supply of 18,040,537 BTC at press time, a market cap for BTC of $8 trillion would result in a single coin worth about $443,400. Even assuming the “flippening” doesn’t take place until the hard cap of 21 million coins in theoretical circulation is reached, a price of around $380,000 results. Should bitcoin cash ( BCH ) flip the market cap of gold given current data, the resultant price is a shimmering $441,800 per coin. None of this is to factor in changes in demand, tech innovation, adoption, etc., for better or for worse. Considering the amount of excitement and FOMO likely to occur in such an event, prices would likely be much, much higher.
While these numbers might seem “far out” upon first encounter, it’s important to note that BTC achieving dollar parity was a big deal less than nine years ago in February, 2011. BTC , worth $1 then, has since increased by about 900,000%, bringing us to the current price.
A September 2017 report by the National Bureau of Economic Research states that “The equivalent of 10% of world GDP is held in tax havens globally,” and with part of crypto’s appeal itself as an “offshore haven” of sorts (although admittedly one that is drawing much heated attention from powerful government agencies such as the IRS and FBI ) it’s interesting to look at bitcoin potentially replacing these tax havens’ share of value, if only as a thought experiment. The projected global gross domestic product (GDP) for 2019 according to IMF and United Nations aggregated data was set at ~$88 trillion last year. Should BTC , BCH , or BSV flip 10% of this amount today, with current circulating supplies of about 18 million each, the resultant value would be a token worth ~$488,888, not far from Bobby Lee’s prediction regarding bitcoin flipping the market cap of gold.
Other typically hot topics include bitcoinization and hyper-bitcoinization, whereby bitcoin overtakes the dominant currency in a given region or overtakes and makes obsolete the currencies of the whole world. The nearly $4 trillion world reserve currency USD circulating in the current M1 money supply would require each bitcoin (whether bitcoin cash, core, or BSV ), at a roughly calculated circulation of 18 million, to be worth about $222,000 in order to serve as a replacement for M1. Swiss multinational bank UBS put this figure at $213,000 over the summer, prior to continued expansion of the monetary supply. Of course, none of this includes the massive amounts of debt and credit on the books in USD as well, which would further dynamize and shape bitcoin price in a hyperbitcoinization event, resulting in astronomical price changes the likes of which likely defy speculation, due to the confluence of cultural and socioeconomic changes that would result from such a financial earthquake.
There’s little easier than making ear-tickling predictions about the riches just around the corner for anyone holding even a small amount of crypto. Should the forecast fail, just chalk it up to unpredictable markets and shout out a new one with equally impassioned bluster next week. Should it succeed, be sure to remind everyone of how you “totally called it” with that “Feeling bullish” tweet two days ago. This isn’t by any means to say that predictions are bad, only that the overconfident and suspiciously detailed ones don’t usually seem to pan out.
While markets really are sometimes anyone’s guess, there are yet sound economic principles and hard realities which can be used to make valuable observations. As fiat currencies and governments worldwide continue in their seeming endless love affair with reckless debasement, the underpinning principles of limited supply, permissionless crypto assets with competitive utility continue to convince many that the flippening may be just around the corner.
What are your thoughts on bitcoin’s potential to “flip” gold? Let us know in the comments section below.
Disclaimer: Price articles and market updates are intended for informational purposes only and should not be considered as trading advice. Neither Bitcoin.com nor the author is responsible for any losses or gains, as the ultimate decision to conduct a trade is made by the reader. Always remember that only those in possession of the private keys are in control of the “money.”
Want to create your own secure cold storage paper wallet? Check our tools section. You can also enjoy the easiest way to buy Bitcoin online with us. Download your free Bitcoin wallet and head to our Purchase Bitcoin page where you can buy BCH and BTC securely.
During the last few months in the midst of the coronavirus outbreak and faltering global economy, many individuals have shown an interest in bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. However, oftentimes people can find the process a bit daunting because they are ... read more.
Hundreds of Sites Now Earn Crypto Trading Fees: Exchange Wordpress Plugin Sees 300 Active Installs
A couple of months ago, a new Wordpress (WP) plugin launched that allows anyone to host a digital currency trading platform. With the application, WP website owners can earn fees from various crypto asset trades. The developer of the plugin ... read more.
Investing in bitcoin has been somewhat of a phenomenon, as millions of individuals have invested funds into the crypto-economy since at least 2010. One specific and lucrative method of investment is dollar-cost averaging. If an individual was to invest $10 ... read more.
On June 24, a Reddit post had a few Bitcoin Cash proponents discussing a number of privacy enhancements BCH supporters can leverage every time they transact. The Bitcoin Cash enthusiast, Mr. Zwet’s r/btc post explained how BCH supporters can use ... read more.
US lawmakers have introduced the Lawful Access to Encrypted Data Act to ensure law enforcement can access encrypted information. This bill is "a full-frontal nuclear assault on encryption in the United States," one expert says. It requires manufacturers of encrypted ... read more.
During the last week, a number of bitcoiners have been discussing Venezuela’s Administrative Service for Identification, Migration, and Foreigners, also known as SAIME accepting bitcoin payments for passport applications and renewals. A number of crypto journalists couldn’t confirm whether or ... read more.
Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, Peter Schiff Will 'Go All-In' on Bitcoin, Says Max Keiser
Max Keiser believes that bitcoin naysayers like Jim Rogers, Mark Cuban, and Peter Schiff will go all-in and invest big in bitcoin when they understand it. He guarantees this to be the case, having predicted that the price of bitcoin ... read more.
'Casino Jack' Abramoff Charged in AML Bitcoin Cryptocurrency Fraud Case, Could Return to Prison
Jack Abramoff, the lobbyist behind one of the biggest Washington lobbying scandals as portrayed in the feature film Casino Jack, has been charged in connection with AML bitcoin cryptocurrency. He faces returning to jail after previously serving three and a ... read more.
Crypto market skeptics and speculators are concerned about 789,000 ETH that started moving four days ago last Wednesday. The transaction was recorded by Whale Alert, and the $187 million worth of ether stems from the Plustoken scammers. On Wednesday, June ... read more.
Federated Sidechains: $8M in BTC Stuck in Limbo, Analyst Says Action 'Violates Liquid's Security Model'
Liquid, the sidechain network developed by the company Blockstream, saw 870 bitcoins ($8 million) frozen in moderation queue due to a seizure from a number of the network’s functionaries. The founder of the Summa project, James Prestwich, explained on Twitter ... read more.
With the fourth of July approaching, many Americans will have to contemplate whether or not the holiday is an empty affair. After the last thirteen weeks of Covid-19 lockdowns, business shutdowns, and police brutality, the lack of liberty and freedoms ... read more.
Lebanon's Financial Meltdown: Currency Plunges 80%, Huge Losses at Central Bank, IMF Bailout Stalled
The financial crisis in Lebanon has seen its currency, the Lebanese pound, fall 80%. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that the country's central bank has accumulated losses as much as 170 trillion pounds. The disagreement between the Lebanese ... read more.
Bitcoin.org Maintainer Calls for the Removal of Cobra, Website Owner Then Fires Him
The infamous and controversial owner of the website bitcoin.org, Cobra, is under fire recently and a number of community members have asked to see the website removed from his possession. The initial argument was sparked by the website’s maintainer, Will ... read more.
Decentralized finance (Defi) protocol ​Balancer was on Sunday hacked for more than $450,000 worth of cryptocurrency. In two separate transactions, an attacker targeted two pools containing Ethereum-based tokens with transfer fees - or so-called deflationary tokens. Pools with Sta and ... read more.
On June 24, the block explorer and blockchain data platform, Blockchair, announced the launch of a new privacy tool called the “Privacy-o-meter.” According to Blockchair, the new service combats blockchain surveillance companies by highlighting privacy issues for crypto transactions. This ... read more.
This month Bitcoin.com launched two services that help facilitate bitcoin cash adoption and crypto remittance via email. In a recent video on June 5, Bitcoin.com’s Roger Ver showcased gifts.bitcoin.com, a new feature that allows individuals to send BCH gift cards ... read more.
U.S. contract mining firm Core Scientific has agreed on a deal to buy 17,600 mining rigs from Chinese bitcoin hardware maker Bitmain Technologies Inc. The company is buying Bitmain's next-generation bitcoin (BTC) miner, the Antminer S19, it said in a ... read more.
Comprehensive Analysis Predicts Bitcoin Price Near $20K This Year, $398K by 2030
A new, comprehensive analysis has predicted the price of bitcoin to reach almost $20K this year and will keep rising to almost $400K by 2030. The researchers have also predicted the future prices of several other major cryptocurrencies, including bitcoin ... read more.
Indian Crypto Banks and Exchanges See Massive Growth Amid Rising Covid-19 Crisis: Survey
The crypto industry in India is experiencing massive growth, according to a new survey of crypto banks and exchanges. Despite the country's deepening coronavirus crisis, crypto exchanges say trading volumes and the number of signups continue to grow substantially. India's ... read more.
The amount of bitcoin that has not moved in over a year is at an all-time high. The last peak was in 2016, before the bitcoin bull run that saw the price spike to $20K. Several forecasting models have predicted ... read more.
Bamboozled: Gavin Andresen Says He Could Have Been Fooled by Craig Wright, BSV Supporters Speak Out
This week a number of Kleiman v. Wright lawsuit depositions have published and are now available for public viewing. One specific deposition with the former Bitcoin Core lead maintainer, Gavin Andresen, casts doubt on the claim that Wright is Satoshi ... read more.
During the last seven days, the price of bitcoin has dropped 4.8% from a high of $9,700 on June 24, to a low of $8,965 on June 27. Since then the price has increased and the price per bitcoin is ... read more.
Hut 8 Mining Corp. has raised $8.3 million from the sale of 6% of its shares to investors. The Canadian bitcoin miner originally intended to raise $7.5 million from the sale, but it was oversubscribed. Totonto Stock Exchange-listed Hut 8 ... read more.
CryptoAltum, a popular MT5 platform, executes trades using market execution with all trades filled at the best available price in the market. The company uses Fill or Kill orders meaning orders are filled entirely at the best available price, with ... read more.
The gold industry has been shaken after it was discovered that 83 tons of fake gold bars have been used as collateral for loans worth 20 billion yuan from 14 financial institutions to a major gold jewelry manufacturer in Wuhan, ... read more.
Brewdog Tokyo Accepts Bitcoin Cash Payments: Local BCH Meetup Gathers to Celebrate
On July 1, 2020, the popular eatery and bar in Japan, Brewdog Tokyo, started accepting bitcoin cash payments for products and services. The establishment is the third Brewdog bar to accept bitcoin cash, as the cryptocurrency is accepted at the ... read more.
The second quarter of 2020 was very profitable for bitcoin investors, according to data analytics firm Skew. During the period, the top cryptocurrency climbed 42%, its fourth-best quarterly close since 2014. For the March quarter, the digital asset fell 10.6%, ... read more.
Tether's Market Valuation Grows 144% in 2020, USDT Market Cap Worth $10 Billion
The most popular stablecoin, Tether, has propelled its way into the third-largest position by cryptocurrency market capitalization. At the time of publication, a number of market valuation aggregators show that Tether’s market cap is between $9.1 to $10.1 billion. Tether ... read more.
Alt-Right Activist Stefan Molyneux Banned from Youtube, Raises $100K in Crypto Donations
The founder of Freedomain, philosopher and alt-right activist, Stefan Molyneux, received more than $100,000 in cryptocurrency donations after he was banned from Youtube on June 29, 2020. Stefan Molyneux is well known for his Youtube videos, podcasts, and books. His ... read more.
The UK's top financial regulator has conducted a survey and found a "significant increase" in the number of crypto owners and awareness of cryptocurrencies. The regulator estimates that 2.6 million people in the country have bought cryptocurrencies, most of which ... read more.
Governments in nearly 100 countries have been sharing offshore bank account information in an effort to crack down on tax evasion. Their "Automatic exchange of information" has led to uncovering 10 trillion euros ($11 trillion) in offshore assets in 84 ... read more.
A recent report from ZUBR Research explains that by 2028, retail demand for bitcoin will exceed the new supply. The report highlights that in eight years as Bitcoin’s supply rate decreases “retail size addresses [will] begin to eat up all ... read more.
During the last few days, a number of cryptocurrency supporters have been discussing Paul Sztorc’s Drivechain project, also referred to as "Drivenet." The Drivechain project has been a work in progress for years now, and just recently Sztorc published a ... read more.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) crypto exchange Localbitcoins has reported that 2019 revenue rose 10% to $29.6 million from $27 million a year ago. For the year, operating income fell 6% to $19.9 million from $21.2 million the year before. Localbitcoins did not ... read more.
