Trenchev also pointed out that Bitcoin is mostly uncorrelated to the rest of the market, providing asymmetric returns for holders of the cryptocurrency.
Miller pointed out that Bitcoin hasn’t grown much as a payment option since he tried to live on the digital currency for a Bloomberg investigative report back in 2012, but Trenchev claimed the main selling point of Bitcoin has evolved over the years.
“The initial idea was: We’re going to pay for coffees with Bitcoin,” said Trenchev. “But, obviously, that has failed to materialize. The narrative, now, that is much more persuasive is that Bitcoin is the new gold, and we see confirmation with the turmoil that we have this morning — Bitcoin is rallying on par with gold.”
Trenchev added that the Bitcoin price would reach the $50,000 level if the crypto asset is able to take hold of 10% of the current gold market. The Nexo co-founder claimed that, eventually, people will only be able to afford to buy satoshis rather than whole Bitcoins for their portfolios.
Members of the cryptocurrency industry are not the only ones who are aware of Bitcoin’s potential, as members of the United States Congress also envision a world where this technology could have a major impact on society. Congressman Patrick McHenry (R-NC) has said Bitcoin has enormous long term value , while Congressman Brad Sherman (D-CA) is worried about the cryptocurrency’s potential impact on the U.S. dollar as the major reserve currency in the world.
I created http://thecryptofeed.net, which is intended to be the front page of Bitcoin and online privacy news on the internet. I'm also a longtime Bitcoin writer who has
I created http://thecryptofeed.net, which is intended to be the front page of Bitcoin and online privacy news on the internet. I'm also a longtime Bitcoin writer who has worked all over the Bitcoin media space—from being editor-in-chief at Inside Bitcoins to contributing to Bitcoin Magazine on a regular basis. My work has also been featured in Business Insider, VICE Motherboard, Wired UK, and many other financial and tech media outlets. I'm mostly interested in the use of Bitcoin for transactions that would be censored by the traditional financial system (think darknet markets and ransomware) in addition to the use of bitcoin as an unseizable, digital store of value. Altcoins, appcoins, and ICOs don't make much sense to me. Find all of my work at kyletorpey.com. Disclosure: I hold some bitcoin.
