Investors interested in agri-food need look no further than Tyson Foods. The Arkansas-based company is the world’s second largest processor and marketer of chicken, beef and pork, and it exports the largest percentage of beef outside of the United States each year. Tyson Foods also owns major food brands such as Jimmy Dean, Hillshire Farm, Ball Park and State Fair.
The company has received criticism over the years for its treatment of animals and pollution record, and was especially hard hit by the Covid-19 pandemic. The disease ran through its processing plants, killing several employees in the process. If that weren’t enough, the U.S. Department of Justice recently implicated Tyson Foods in a price-fixing scheme . Tyson Foods was quick to respond and has been cooperating with federal authorities in the case in exchange for leniency.
TSN stock fell nearly 50% during the pandemic’s peak in March and April. And its recovery has been slow. TSN stock looks attractive at $58.28 a share, well below its January peak of $94.24. And the company’s financials point to a potential bounce. Analysts forecast that, over the next five years, Tyson Foods’ average earnings will increase by 14% a year. Over the last year, prices for meat , poultry and fish rose by 10%, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
As with other companies on this list, Tyson Foods has treated shareholders well over the years, with an annual dividend of $1.68 per share. Tyson Foods has raised its dividend 12% over the past year, and the percentage of profits going to the dividend payout is nearly 40%, which is extremely generous. Investors with a long-term horizon who seek dividend income should definitely consider buying TSN stock.
Joel Baglole has been a business journalist for 20 years. He spent five years as a staff reporter at The Wall Street Journal, and has also written for The Washington Post and Toronto Star newspapers, as well as financial websites such as The Motley Fool and Investopedia. As of this writing, Joel Baglole did not hold any stock of the aforementioned companies.
Matt McCall has pinpointed 20 recommendations that have soared 1,000% or more… He’s uncovered 200 stocks that have gone up 100% or more… One went up 546% in five months last year.
Article printed from InvestorPlace Media, https://investorplace.com/2020/06/4-top-agriculture-stocks-2020-to-grow-your-portfolio/.
