PM Narendra Modi shares vision...
NEW DELHI: On the completion of one year of BJP government 's second term in office, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday shared a roadmap for key sectors like agriculture, defence , health and education.
In a series of tweets, PM Modi shared documents on four key sectors, saying the content gives a comprehensive picture of the work done by the Central government and the vision for a New India .
Saying that India is "extremely proud" of its farmers who work day and night to feed the nation, the PM said that the government is energising the agriculture sector with reforms and measures that improve the lives of farmers, ensure better markets and eliminate the role of middlemen.
India is extremely proud of our farmers. They work day and night to feed the nation. We are energising the agricu… https://t.co/CjNAET5QDU
"Farmers in India have been trapped for long in a vicious cycle, and a deep sense of need for actual reform in the sector had been felt. Simple steps as the choice of buyer had become a vexed issue," the documents said.
"Farmers can now sell anywhere as per their will. This in turn will enable better price realization for farmers, attracting investments and make agriculture competitive, thus becoming a key contributor to the promise of doubling farmer incomes," it said.
The document added that the announcement to amend the Essential Commodities Act also comes as a bold step. "This reform aimed at deregulation in various commodities such as vegetables, cereals, pulses, etc, enables greater price benefits for farmers. These reforms were big bold steps that actually go a long way to free farmers," it said.
Opening up new avenues of self-reliance in defence, space, atomic energy
PM Modi said that being "self-reliant" in the defence sector is the need of the hour.
The document shared by the PM said that the Modi government announced a series of reform that have served the cause of ‘India first’ through reforms that enhance India’s competitiveness in global platform while achieving self-reliance.
Being self-reliant in the defence sector is the need of the hour. Here is a perspective on how India is doing it. https://t.co/pD7LOOGspD
"Ever since the Modi government came in, it is addressing decades-old demands in the defence sector on two fronts. The Make in India push in the defence sector and clearing the procurements that were overdue such as fighter aircraft, attack helicopters, guns, etc.
"Now amidst the corona crisis, self-reliance in defence manufacturing has been taken to the next level with a host of measures," it said.
About the space sector, the document said, "In this day and age, putting India first on global stage depends on its capability in space technology as well. India’s premier institute ISRO has already made India a force to reckon with in this regard."
Talking about the reforms in atomic energy, it said that paving the way for private participation has also opened new areas of opportunities in India’s growth.
"In shaping the post-Corona world, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has brought together talents beyond the government system in sophisticated sectors like defence, space, and atomic to use them for the greater common good," the document read.
Sharing another document on 'national infrastructure pipeline', PM Modi called it 'creating next-generation infrastructure' for India’s progress.
The document shared by PM Modi said that the National Infrastructure Pipeline aims at investing over Rs 100 lakh crore into several infrastructure projects between 2019 and 2025. The aim of this pipeline is to ensure that India remains on track towards the target of achieving $5 trillion GDP by 2024-25.
Creating next-generation infrastructure for India’s progress. https://t.co/e9Qe5CgCiL
"The NIP identifies the areas of infrastructure spending and development, and also enumerates in detail the way in which public-private partnership model can be effectively implemented, both in terms of financing as well as delivery," the document said.
Sharing the fourth document, the PM said that in the times to come, healthcare will assume even greater importance. "We in India have been working to create a system where the poor have access to top quality and affordable healthcare," he tweeted.
In the times to come, healthcare will assume even greater importance. We in India have been working to create a sys… https://t.co/9TS8GoVtlo
The document said that with an acute focus on affordable health care, the Modi government has taken the health system of India to new levels.
"The total per capita government spending on healthcare has nearly doubled from Rs 1,008 per person in FY15 to Rs 1,944 in FY20. Further, the budget allocation for the Department of Health and Family Welfare surged from Rs 37,061 crore in FY17 to Rs 65,001 crore in FY21," read the document.
