A library dedicated to agriculture in the agri-centric panchayat of Keerampara near Kothamangalam has caught public attention again, thanks to the new-found interest in backyard farming as a result of the lockdown. The agriculture library, set up by the Keerampara Service Cooperative Bank alongside its office building nearly two years ago, has a collection of agriculture-related books and periodicals in Malayalam. This is in addition to the regular library run by the bank.
“We evolved the concept of a library for agriculture to dispense knowledge and to dispel many misconceptions about farming. The library has been attracting more people since the outbreak of the pandemic as people seem to be increasingly turning to backyard farming. Many have no clue how to go about it and our library comes in handy for them,” said K.K. Daney, who has been the president of the bank for the past 18 years.
While there are over 100 subscribed members, people are free to drop in at the library and make use of it as visitors to the bank often do. The library has been consistently organising seminars on farming. The computer database at the library offers visitors and members information and contact numbers of various farm institutions in the district and agriculture support schemes.
The bank, which has been supporting the panchayat’s largely agrarian society, is being run by an alliance forged in the interest of agriculture for the past 18 years. “The nine members of the committee have their own political affiliations, which are never allowed to affect the larger interest of the bank and the farming-oriented people it supports,” said Mr. Daney.
You have reached your limit for free articles this month.
Start your 14 days trial now. Sign Up
Find mobile-friendly version of articles from the day's newspaper in one easy-to-read list.
Enjoy reading as many articles as you wish without any limitations.
A select list of articles that match your interests and tastes.
Move smoothly between articles as our pages load instantly.
A one-stop-shop for seeing the latest updates, and managing your preferences.
We brief you on the latest and most important developments, three times a day.
Not convinced? Know why you should pay for news.
*Our Digital Subscription plans do not currently include the e-paper ,crossword, iPhone, iPad mobile applications and print. Our plans enhance your reading experience.
We have been keeping you up-to-date with information on the developments in India and the world that have a bearing on our health and wellbeing, our lives and livelihoods, during these difficult times. To enable wide dissemination of news that is in public interest, we have increased the number of articles that can be read free, and extended free trial periods. However, we have a request for those who can afford to subscribe: please do. As we fight disinformation and misinformation, and keep apace with the happenings, we need to commit greater resources to news gathering operations. We promise to deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Your support for our journalism is invaluable. It’s a support for truth and fairness in journalism. It has helped us keep apace with events and happenings.
The Hindu has always stood for journalism that is in the public interest. At this difficult time, it becomes even more important that we have access to information that has a bearing on our health and well-being, our lives, and livelihoods. As a subscriber, you are not only a beneficiary of our work but also its enabler.
We also reiterate here the promise that our team of reporters, copy editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers will deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
