Note: The above-mentioned figures may vary based on the type of loan scheme you select.
Foreclosure charges - would be levied if the borrower prepays his loans & closes loan account before completion of the loan repayment term.
Processing fee - A one-time processing fee would be deducted from the borrower’s sanctioned loan amount before it is disbursed.
Stamp duty charges - is charged at actuals or as per the applicable state laws.
Late payment charges - If the EMI is not paid as per the schedule specified by lender then late payment charges will be levied.
Bounce charges - is charged if the repayment cheque bounces.
Valuation charges - is charged if applicant’s residential / commercial property undergoes valuation.
Documentation charges - Will be charged as applicable.
In India we have many banks that help farmers across their designated regions when it comes to agriculture finance, available in exclusive government recognised banks to maintain maximum transparency in loan handling and to ensure that cultivators do not have to deal with paying extra for taking loans from a repetitive bank.
SBI has the largest network in India, with a branch functioning with all facilities in the most rural parts of the country. It provides Crop Loans, Kisan Credit Card Scheme, agricultural term loans, Produce Marketing Loan Scheme, Loan Against Warehouse Receipts, Land Development Scheme, Minor Irrigation Scheme, Land Purchase Scheme, Kisan Gold Card Scheme,  Krishi Plus Scheme, Arthias Plus Scheme, Finance To Horticulture, Broiler Plus Scheme etc. SBI also offers Microfinance through Self Help Groups along with loans through 30 regional rural banks.
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) offers Kisan Credit Card (KCC) Scheme and crop loans under its Rashtriya Krishi Bima Yojana. It also provides short & long-term refinancing along with direct lending. The term of refinancing can range from 18 months to more than 5 years.
Nationalised banks that offer agricultural loans are Punjab National Bank (PNB), Oriental Bank of Commerce, Union Bank of India, Vijaya Bank, UCO Bank, United Bank of India, Allahabad Bank, Andhra Bank, Syndicate Bank, Dena Bank, Indian Bank and Bank of Baroda etc.
Hey! I am Abha Toppo . Did you liked this article and have suggestions to improve this article? Mail me your suggestions and feedback.
