Notwithstanding the ragging controversy in NCDEX over investors defaulting in castorseed contract, the Bombay Stock Exchange will launch castor futures contract on its commodity platform on Monday.
In fact, BSE will expanding it agriculture contract offering by launching futures on chana and soyabean on Monday with the option of compulsory delivery on all the three new contracts starting from November.
The country’s largest agriculture commodity exchange NCDEX had to extinguish castor contracts worth Rs 735 crore or 50 per cent of open interest using the contract tear-up option for the first time-ever after some of its members started defaulting on margins as prices plunged from a high of about Rs 5,600 a quintal to a low of Rs 4,270.
In fact, the October contract of castor seed on NCDEX hit the lower circuit of four per cent for the seventh consecutive day on Friday.
Asked about the timing of castorseed contract launch, Sameer Patil, Chief Business Officer, BSE, said the new launches has nothing to do with the trouble in the other exchange but the trade has been pushing BSE for launching new agriculture futures ever since market feedback was sought.
To start with, BSE will have three castorseed contracts expiring in November to January. It will launch February contract next month and subsequent months will be launched from December.
The contract will have Patan in Gujarat as the basic delivery centre while Deesa and Kadi will be additional delivery centres. The open position limit for the near month contract has been fixed at 3,750 tonnes for individual clients and at member level it will be 15,000 tonnes or one-fourth of the member’s overall position limit in that commodity, whichever is higher.
The exchange will launch four new contracts in soybean expiring from November to February. The basic delivery centre would be Indore in Madhya Pradesh and additional delivery centres at Akola, Nanded and Hingangath in Maharashtra besides Vidisha and Mansour in Madhya Pradesh.
The coronavirus crisis has changed the world completely in the last few months. All of us have been locked into our homes, economic activity has come to a near standstill.
In these difficult times, we, at BusinessLine, are trying our best to ensure the newspaper reaches your hands every day. You can also access BusinessLine in the e-paper format – just as it appears in print. Our website and apps too, are updated every minute.
But all this comes at a heavy cost. As you are aware, the lockdowns have wiped out almost all our entire revenue stream. That we have managed so far is thanks to your support. I thank all our subscribers – print and digital – for your support.
I appeal to all our readers to help us navigate these challenging times and help sustain one of the truly independent and credible voices in the world of Indian journalism. You can help us by subscribing to our digital or e-paper editions. We offer several affordable subscription plans for our website, which includes Portfolio, our investment advisory section.
Our subscriptions start as low as Rs 199/- per month. A yearly package costs just Rs. 999 – a mere Rs 2.75 per day, less than a third the price of a cup of roadside chai..
A little help from you can make a huge difference to the cause of quality journalism!
