Case IH announced tractor and baler news as thousands of farmers flock to Louisville, Kentucky, to see the latest in red machinery for themselves at the 2020 National Farm Machinery Show.
Designed especially for livestock producers who want a premium all-purpose tractor, Case IH has unveiled its new model year 2020 Vestrum series tractors. The new line includes two models, the Vestrum 100 with 100 hp. and the Vestrum 130 with a 130 hp. rating. Both machines feature a 28.5-gallon-per-minute maximum hydraulic pump flow rate and lift capacity of 6,700 pounds.
“Before the Vestrum, producers couldn’t get a tractor in the 100 hp. class with this amount of versatility and comfort,” says Greg Lucey, marketing manager.
Also with livestock producers in mind, Case IH is adding a lineup of large square baler accumulators to its offering.
“Using an accumulator to prepackage and dump multiple uniform bales helps producers streamline their operation by reducing the number of trips needed across their fields, ultimately saving money on fuel, time, and equipment wear and tear,” says Brian Spencer, senior marketing manager.
Case IH large square bale accumulators are available in a number of configurations. The company claims they reduce loading time by up to 50% and automatically group bales in the desired dump pattern, either stacked or horizontal.
The AC3108 horizontally stacks three 3×3 bales, while the AC4108 horizontally stacks three 4×3 bales. The AC5150 horizontally stacks five bales.
The VS1208 was designed for farmers who need vertically stacked bales. It can stack three 4-foot-wide bales on top of each other for easy loading.
“Producers need a reliable tractor that’s ready for a hard day’s work and offered at an excellent value,” says Lucey.
Case IH has added three new models to its Farmall Utility A Series line. Like other machines in the family, the new 95A, 105A, and 115A will be positioned as value tractors that won’t break the bank.
The 115A has 120 engine hp. and delivers 100 PTTO horsepower – the highest available in the Farmall utility A lineup.
These three models are equipped with a four-cylinder engine designed for handling a wide range of implements including a loader, round baler, auger, disc mower conditioner, and more.
