Home » News » Central Exim Policy detrimental to farmers: Harish Rao
Central Exim Policy detrimental to farmers: Harish Rao
By Author TelanganaToday | Published: 4th Jul 2020 10:12 pm
fertilizer to the crop in Raikode mandal, Sangareddy district on Saturday. MP BB Patil is also seen.
Sangareddy: Finance Minister T Harish Rao observed that the the Central Import and Export Policy on food grains is harming the interests of farmers in the country. Asking the Centre to allow the imports of the grains which were not produced in the country, Rao demanded the Centre to revise the liberal Import Policy so that Indian farmers will earn some profits. While the farmers in the States like Telangana had the capability of exporting the agriculture produce to foreign countries, the Finance Minister said that Central government had permitted the imports of red gram liberally into the country from African countries.
Addressing the farmers after laying a foundation stone for construction of Rythu Vedika at Kamkole village of Munipally mandal in the district on Saturday, Rao demanded the Union government to amend the Import and Export Bill banning the imports of agriculture produce. Underscoring the importance of making India self-reliant by encouraging the farmers to cultivate all crops to meet the domestic needs, Rao asked the Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led government to initiate various measures to make the Indian farmers export to other nations.
Saying that the Centre was banning the exports of onion and potato whenever the prices goes up in domestic market, the Minister observed that such ban was restricting the farmers from making profits. When the prices of cotton goes up in international market, he said that the Cotton Corporation of India (CCI) is making the profits. He demanded the Centre to make the CCI to share such profits with farmers. He asked the Centre to buy from farmers by providing MSP and make available in the market at subsidised price to benefit both the middle class and farmers. Since the Centre had right to decide the MSP of all the agriculture produce, he urged the Union government to revise the Export and Import policy.
The Minister said that Telangana was the only State in the country that wholeheartedly working for farmer’s welfare. He said his government had bought red gram at Rs 5,850 while it was being sold at Rs 4,000 in the open market. Rao said that they procured all the grains by offering MSP. The Minister hoped that Rythu Vedikas would emerge as flatforms to discuss and deliberate the issues pertaining to them at village level.
Earlier, Rao inaugurated children park, mini-garden, dump yard and vaikuntadhamam at Sangapur village of Raikode mandal. MP BB Patil, Zilla Parishad Chairperson, P Manjusri, Collector Sangareddy M Hanumantha Rao, MLA, Chanti Kranthi Kiran and others were present. The Minister, on his way, stopped his convoy to talk to farmers and he bought guava fruits from a roadside vendor.
Now you can get handpicked stories from Telangana Today on Telegram everyday. Click the link to subscribe.
