This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
In the movie adapted from Pearl Buck’s novel The Good Earth, the self-made male lead Wang warns his village he will be ruined if an approaching swarm of locusts eats his crops. Incredulous bystanders wonder how that could be. After all, he has become the richest man in town. He cries out that all his capital is in the fields before running out to battle the bugs.
Buck made an incisive observation: Farming takes a lot of working capital, and farmers risk everything, or a big portion of their net worth, every year. That’s a big reason why farmers are less worried about demand and much more worried about natural disasters such as floods and pests. (It’s also a big reason governments have historically subsidized farmers—you can’t have a country’s food supply go bankrupt.)
Investors can use that quirky nature of farming to their advantage. Adding agricultural assets to a portfolio can reduce risk without sacrificing return. And investors get the low-risk/high-return economic “free lunch” because the agricultural business is uncorrelated with the broader economy.
Take, for instance, shares of the largest agricultural equipment maker Deere (ticker: DE). Over its history, Deere stock is less correlated with manufacturing activity and more correlated with agricultural commodity prices.
That helps protect a portfolio when the global economy is slowing. But investors don’t have to sacrifice return to get less volatility. Deere stock has returned 17.6% a year on average over the last decade, better than the 15.4% average annual return of the Dow Jones Industrial Average over the same span.
Deere profits are less dependent on the global economy because farming is all about the weather. And because all of the available supply of a given crop is grown over just a few months each year.
All of the gold ever mined still exists and is available to trade and hoard. A huge new gold mine contributes no more than 2% to the worldwide supply of gold each year. That’s why gold investors rarely talk about mine supply. Instead, they worry about the demand for gold from speculators trying to protect themselves against the debasement of paper currency.
On the other hand, there is no corn inventory from production long ago. The world grows the amount of corn it uses every year. That’s why agricultural traders look to the skies and worry about the weather. Farming is a supply-driven business.
Of course, demand for a commodity matters. But food demand is very stable. During the financial crisis, for instance, U.S. car sales dipped 44%, but worldwide soybean consumption dipped only 3% over the same span. People have to eat.
Today, the weather is bad and farming assets have taken a hit . Deere stock is down 9% year to date, worse than the 10% return of the Dow.
“The [U.S. farmer] is the most stressed in the world in terms of grower sentiment, given tariffs and weather,” Mark Douglas, the president and COO of crop chemical company FMC (FMC), said in an interview. “We are at the bottom of the trough in terms of commodity prices, too.”
Eventually, however, crop prices will improve and farmers will need to replace their tractors. That could make now a good time to add Deere stock to a portfolio. Deere shares are trading at 13 times estimated 2019 earnings. That’s not the lowest the stock has traded at, but it’s a 13% discount to its 10-year historical average.
In the movie adapted from Pearl Buck’s novel The Good Earth, the self-made male lead Wang warns his village he will be ruined if an approaching swarm of locusts eats his crops.
