Leads the Inclusive Growth and Private-Sector Development Practice in the Governance team at the Tony Blair Institute for Global Change.
Richardson Okechukwu, a scientist who studies cassava speaks to Associated Press in a Cassava farm, "Come war, Come anything, the farmer who has cassava has food," in Ibadan, Nigeria. (AP Photo/Sunday Alamba)
In the aftermath of the financial and debt crises that started in 2007, food prices increased 57% in 2008 and 64 per cent in 2012, leading to a global food emergency in which 75 million more people went to bed hungry. The food crisis contributed to major protests and instability across the world, including in Mexico, Bangladesh and Burkina Faso. In the Middle East, it helped trigger the Arab Spring of 2012.
In March 2020, as shelves emptied in supermarkets across the world, there were concerns that a similar story might unfold. Many countries faced worker shortages: Italian farmers could not hire the 350,000 temporary workers they normally do for the spring planting season hit . And some countries restricted the export of strategic food commodities, like wheat in Russia and rice in Vietnam .
But despite these warning signs, food supply chains have so far broadly continued delivering food to populations in Europe, North America and most of Asia and South America. Global production is much higher than it was in 2008, with stock of cereals twice as high .
Yet the situation is different across much of Africa.
Food systems and the governance mechanisms that underpin them remain weak, and many countries also lack the social welfare mechanisms, institutions and strength of the private sector to mitigate the impact. The disruptions to supply chains caused by COVID-19 have shone a light on these vulnerabilities.
We can now see that there are four underlying factors which are driving a potential food crisis across Africa.
First, African households affected by COVID-19 containment measures and the global economic downturn have less money to purchase food. Analysis by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) shows that during Rwanda’s six-week lockdown between 21 March and 4 May, total GDP declined by 39% and poverty increased by 20 percentage points.
