The finance minister urged states to dismantle Agriculture Produce Marketing Committees (APMC) and switch to National Agriculture Market (eNAM), which is a pan-India electronic trading portal that networks the existing APMC mandis to create a unified national market for agricultural commodities.
She also asked farmers to produce oilseeds in place of other crops as India particularly imports edible oil and palm oil.
NEW DELHI: The government will form 10,000 farmer producer organisations to ensure that farmers get the correct price for their produce, finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman has said.
The finance minister urged states to dismantle Agriculture Produce Marketing Committees (APMC) and switch to National Agriculture Market (eNAM), which is a pan-India electronic trading portal that networks the existing APMC mandis to create a unified national market for agricultural commodities.
She also highlighted the role of self-help groups in rural developments and said the government had in the budget said it will provide Rs 1lakh to each of these SHGs to bring growth in rural parts.
“The approach to farmers, farming community-related to women, agriculture and agri-related matters would have synergy and have a dynamic effect to the rural economy," the minister said.
She also asked farmers to produce oilseeds in place of other crops as India particularly imports edible oil and palm oil.
“We are telling farmers which crops will give them a better price in the area. We are also telling them what all crops can be irrigated or cannot be irrigated on the rainfed land,” she said while addressing the sixth World Congress on Rural & Agriculture Finance in New Delhi.
“The support price may be given for other things but please do produce oilseeds because they have a great demand in India. Edible oil consumption is also a matter of great concern, as we still import quite a lot quantity particularly palm oil," she said.
The minister asked National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) chairman Harsh Kumar Bhanwala to visit Jammu and Kashmir to ensure that the farmers get the correct price of their produce in the next season.
“You are aware that recently we used NAFED to procure apples from J&K so that there is no single farmer left with unsold apples. I am ensuring that I will take the chairman of NABARD to J&K so that the producers can get the right price for their next crop of saffron, peaches and walnuts,” she said.
The minister also said the central government is making efforts to push sustainable and renewable energy sources in rural areas in order to provide farmers.
“I want anna daata (food provider) to be urja daata (energy giver) also. We are working in a direction where we can install solar panels, turbines etc so that farmers can generate power on those pieces of land where they are unable to grow the produce,” she said.
