Especially if you're a novice investor, one of the best things you can do with your stimulus check is to plunk it down into a boring index fund.
Back in 2008, near the depths of the last bear market, Knight Kiplinger wrote to readers, “Why I'm Buying Stocks.” What did he buy on discount? Everything. "I invested in virtually the entire universe of U.S. publicly traded companies, through a "total market" index fund," he wrote. "This gives me a sliver of some 2,500 companies, large and small, in every corner of American business – everyday consumer products, heavy manufacturing, technology, energy, health care, food and agriculture, and yes, even housing and financial services, the most-shunned stocks of all. I'm not sure which of these sectors will fare better than the others, so I hedged my bets by buying all of them."
I know. It's a boring, unsatisfying suggestion. Scroll down if you want to get to the exciting stuff.
But if you're looking to put money to work right away, and you're inexperienced with researching stocks, plain ol' index funds can give you access to a wide range of stocks – typically for minimal fees. Stocks, at least for now, are well off their nadir, but you'd still be buying on a considerable dip right now. The S&P 500, for instance, is down about 15% year-to-date and roughly 19% off its all-time highs.
A straightforward suggestion is an S&P 500 tracking fund such as the Vanguard S&P 500 ETF ( VOO ) or SPDR Portfolio S&P 500 ETF ( SPLG ), both of which charge just 0.03%, or $3 for every $10,000 invested, each year to own.
But there are other ways to “buy the market.” The Vanguard Total Stock Market ETF ( VTI ), for instance, holds 3,535 stocks, spread across large-, mid- and even small-cap companies. The fund is cap-weighted, meaning that each stock's weight is determined by its market cap, meaning that most of its weight is in the same stocks VOO and SPLG hold. But you get a little more exposure to the “growthier” small companies that trade on U.S. exchanges.
If you're worried that the S&P 500 is too top-heavy – Microsoft ( MSFT ), Apple ( AAPL ), Amazon ( AMZN ), Facebook ( FB ) and Alphabet ( GOOGL ) make up nearly 20% of the index's weight – you can try the Invesco S&P 500 Equal Weight ETF ( RSP ). This fund invests in each S&P 500 stock at the same weight every quarter when the fund rebalances. Do you want more of these tech giants? Consider the Invesco QQQ Portfolio ( QQQ ), which invests in the 100 largest nonfinancial companies in the Nasdaq; those aforementioned technology companies make up nearly 45% of the portfolio!
