Last year wasn’t great for local farmers because of the mini-recession that resulted from the legalization of cannabis, but the COVID-19 pandemic has unexpectedly turned things around.
Several local farms have sold out of shares for their Community Supported Agriculture programs, which allow customers to buy a share in exchange for a weekly supply of seasonal produce, and possibly other products, from the farm.
DeepSeeded Community Farm, Shakefork Community Farm and Redwood Roots farm have sold out of shares and Fair Curve Farm stopped taking signups Saturday after doubling their subscriptions from 45 last season to around a hundred this time around.
“The demand is greater than the supply right now,” said Laura Hughes, the North Coast Growers’ Association’s director of market operations.
Janet Czarnecki, owner of Redwood Roots Farm, said all 160 shares of her CSA sold out two weeks ago, but she still gets calls a few times a day inquiring about signing up.
“I have a waiting list, but now the waiting list is so long is that I’m not taking names anymore,” Czarnecki said. “I’ve been here 22 years. Even during 9/11 it wasn’t anything like this.”
Some more farms have started or expanded their CSAs in response to the demand, such as Luna Farms and Earthly Edibles Farms, or to adapt to the COVID-19 pandemic, such as Green Spiral Farm in Arcata.
Graham Gagne, owner of Green Spiral Farm, said he saw an immediate wave of inquiries about his CSA since he initially announced he was starting it.
“I’d say the local food movement is blossoming right now in response to everything,” Gagne said.
The change in atmosphere at the farmers market and the uncertainty of how safe it was for him and his family to attend were the impetus for Gagne to start a CSA and focus more on wholesaling to grocery stores.
The traffic at his stall was also about a third of what it used to be, Gagne said, though the people who were still coming were “buying more than they used to.”
The farmers markets are getting creative to deal with the decline in foot traffic, including starting their own $20 multi-farm CSA-style box people can preorder and pick up curbside, potentially as soon as next month, Hughes said.
“A lot of our farmers are concerned when their produce becomes more available, they won’t be able to unload the volume they normally would,” Hughes said.
Because of social distancing, only one shopper is allowed at a booth at a time, slowing down sales and making it “physically harder to move that much inventory,” Hughes said.
The growers’ association created an alternative sales outlet directory on its website to see all the options local farms offer to buy their produce, including online ordering.
Aubrey Schooley and Ben Thompson, co-owners of Fair Curve Farm in Ferndale, decided to begin offering a delivery service to CSA shareholders while the COVID-19 pandemic is going on for those who have concerns about going in public.
“Around 25 families out of the hundred or so have been wanting deliveries, so a quarter of our membership,” Schooley said. “But we definitely have members that have expressed they’re excited to come to market.”
For more information on local CSAs and farmers markets, visit northcoastgrowersassociation.org.
Sonia Waraich can be reached at 707-441-0506.
