Govt efforts alone may not bring down water-waste fast enough to avoid looming crisis, the PPP route should be explored
Such policy myopia will have both serious near-term and long-term repercussions; already, a third of the global population facing water scarcity for at least a month every year lives in India and China. (Representative image)
Enough warnings have been sounded on the impending global water crisis, which the climate crisis will only deepen, to expect that India, a high water-stress country, would have taken notice. Yet, going by how the government hasn’t moved on reforming policy for the agriculture sector—90% of all freshwater withdrawal in the country is used by agriculture alone, with groundwater contributing 62% of all irrigation water in the country—India seems to be failing to heed these warnings. Given that the FCI-MSP procurement mess hasn’t really been tackled—food subsidies are estimated at Rs 3.58 crore after factoring in FCI borrowings, and on February 1, FCI’s actual stock exceeded the buffer stock requirement by 36.4 million tonnes—India’s water crisis will only get worse. Such policy myopia will have both serious near-term and long-term repercussions; already, a third of the global population facing water scarcity for at least a month every year lives in India and China.
Groundwater extraction is so severe that the country’s water table is falling at the rate of 0.3 m per year. A recent Ficci-PwC report shows that water level in at least half the wells in India is already plummeting. Bad agricultural policies—both at the central and the state level—have meant that just four crops (rice, wheat, cotton, and sugarcane), accounting for just 46% of the country’s gross cropped area, take up 65% of the gross irrigated area, and consume 70% of all the water used in agriculture. Thanks to public procurement focusing on just two/three states, paddy is grown on all of Punjab’s irrigated area despite the state’s irrigation water productivity (IWP) of just 19 kg/lakh litre for the crop, while in Assam and Odisha, the crop accounts for just 11% and 35% of the gross irrigated area, respectively, despite IWPs of 51 kg/lakh litre and 30 kg/lakh litre. No wonder, India draws 45% of its 1,446 billion cubic metres (bcm) of internal renewable freshwater while China draws just 21% of its 2,813 bcm, and Brazil, which has the largest acreage of water-guzzler sugarcane, draws just 1% of its 5,661 bcm. India’s agri-trade growth has also meant that it exports four times as much embedded water as it imports while China exports just a tenth of what it imports.
