Following the pandemic, NABARD has provided Rs 25,000 crore nationwide for providing liquidity support to Cooperative Banks, Regional Rural Banks and Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) during 2020-21 with a view to ensuring continued flow of credit to farmers.
S S Saha, Chief General Manager, NABARD, Assam Regional Office, Guwahati informed that in Assam an amount of Rs 270 crore under this facility has been extended to Assam Gramin Vikash Bank for supporting the agricultural activities of the farmers.
In the wake of the COVID-19 Pandemic, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development ( NABARD ) has made available a Special Liquidity Facility (SLF) of Rs 270 crore to Assam Gramin Vikash Bank for supporting the agricultural activities of the farmers.
Following the pandemic, NABARD has provided Rs 25,000 crore nationwide for providing liquidity support to Cooperative Banks , Regional Rural Banks and Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) during 2020-21 with a view to ensuring continued flow of credit to farmers to carry out their agricultural operations smoothly even during COVID-19 pandemic period.
S S Saha, Chief General Manager, NABARD, Assam Regional Office , Guwahati informed that in Assam an amount of Rs 270 crore under this facility has been extended to Assam Gramin Vikash Bank for supporting the agricultural activities of the farmers.
Saha informed that this fund is a front loaded liquidity support and this separate line of credit would prove to be a boon to the agriculture credit of the state at this difficult hour and would enable our farmer friends to intensify their crop production by getting adequate and timely credit.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
