Stella Hundert, Kate Rehbein and Emma Stegman ready for Valentine's Day at One Little Farm.
While Valentine’s Day has always been a time for lovers, this year the team at One Little Farm is sharing the love with Australian farmers.
Like flower producers and florists across the Bundaberg Region, Kate Rehbein and her team have spent months preparing for Valentine’s Day.
For them, Friday will not only be about love, but also about supporting farmers who have suffered through a range of natural disasters in recent times.
“Valentine’s Day this year is all about supporting Aussie farmers, especially with the way the nation has been at the moment with droughts floods and bushfires,” she said.
Kate said the giant cool-room at One Little Farm’s shop on Bargara Road had been filled to the brim with beautiful roses and other flower varieties ready to be given out to lucky residents this Valentine’s Day.
It’s a busy time for the team, who have been working through
40 boxes of flowers and foliage to turn into stunning bouquets.
“We create a large selection of bouquets in various shapes and sizes,” Kate said.
a gesture steeped in tradition, with a floral arrangement making the perfect
“Who doesn't like to receive flowers? It can just brighten someone's day,” she said.
“Whether they are for a loved one, a bereavement or just because.
Kate said the process to ensure flowers stayed fresh in the lead-up to Valentine’s Day took lots of planning.
“Early this week we had boxes upon boxes arriving in the shop,” she said.
“We also often like to add texture with pineapple lilies, beautiful gums and grevilleas to just create a different type of bouquet.”
Kate Rehbein with Valentine’s Day flower arrangements at One Little Farm.
their loved one, thinking about favourite colours and flowers was key.
“Normally we suggest a favourite flower or colour, or whether
your loved one would prefer more texture over flowers,” she said.
One Little Farm is situated at 3/133 Bargara Rd and opens from 8.30am to 5.30pm weekdays and 8.30am to 1.30pm on Saturdays.
