Paraguay acted forcefully against COVID-19 and succeeded in containing the pandemic with very few cases and casualties. But the economic impact has been harsh: GDP is forecast to shrink 5 percent this year. As it seeks to revive growth, the country is also undertaking reforms to improve governance and business climate.
Nineteen people have died, out of around 2,100 cases, in a population of 7 million (about 2 people per million inhabitants). Neighboring Bolivia had more than 31,000 cases and over 1,000 casualties among its over 11 million inhabitants.
But the impact on the economy has been severe. In January we predicted
growth of at least 4 percent this year, and there were signs that we were
floods last year, it looked like economic growth would be strong in 2020.
After a deep recession in the late 1990s and early 2000s, Paraguay had been
growing at an average rate of more than 4 percent in the past 15 years, thanks to a boom in agricultural commodity prices and sound
goods in April were 60 percent lower than a year before. Tourism and trade
percent, but the exact depth of the recession is hard to predict.
finances, already weakened by last year’s drought, which doubled the
deficit to almost 3 percent of GDP. While the plan earlier this year was to
lockdown measures hit people’s livelihoods.
Paraguay’s containment measures were effective, because the authorities
acted fast and forcefully. The first COVID-19 case was known on March 7. By
March 20, the country was in full lockdown, which lasted until May 3. The
(“smart quarantine”). While social distancing requirements have been eased,
face masks are still mandatory in public, temperatures are measured at
To help finance the higher fiscal deficit, Paraguay asked for International
disasters or other shocks—like COVID-19. A $274 million loan was
Now that the economy is starting to reopen, it is time to think about the
next steps. Paraguay has traditionally had good macroeconomic policies,
with low deficits and debt, which has helped to avoid the boom-bust cycles
of other countries in the region. These solid fundamentals will be
important now as the country plots its future.
Once the economic recovery has strengthened, it will be important to
restore the health of public finances. The deficit needs to go back toward the Fiscal Responsibility Law ceiling of 1.5 percent of GDP. How quickly
will depend on the strength of the recovery. The country will have to find
extremely low, about the same as in sub-Saharan Africa, and well below
other emerging countries. Last year’s tax reform was a welcome first step,
but more may be needed to mobilize domestic revenue.
probably going to be slower than in the past 15 years, as some of the
the rapid expansion of cultivated land) have lost strength. Real    income growth was already slowing sharply compared to the 2000s,
when it grew much faster than GDP, contributing to a rapid decline
in poverty. That was explained by the rise in soy prices, which
allowed the country to import more for each ton of soybeans exported. In
Many countries manage to have strong growth spurts, but few succeed in
closing that income gap. What is needed to achieve more convergence?
Macroeconomic stability is a necessary but not sufficient condition. A
recent IMF working paper argues that strong governance, good business climate and human capital can
help poor countries achieve higher incomes faster. Paraguay scores poorly
on these indicators, compared with most other emerging countries. The
government is aware and acting on these challenges.
And just a few days ago, the government announced an ambitious Economic
Recovery Plan, which aims to address not only COVID-19 related    near-term problems, but also longer-standing structural
review of the fiscal responsibility law, administrative reform of the
state, and better public procurement systems. All these reforms would help
come up with such a holistic plan in response to the crisis.
When future economic historians look back at Paraguay in 2020, they
