Editor’s Note: Morning Agriculture is a free version of POLITICO Pro Agriculture’s morning newsletter, which is delivered to our subscribers each morning at 6 a.m. The POLITICO Pro platform combines the news you need with tools you can use to take action on the day’s biggest stories. Act on the news with POLITICO Pro .
— House Ag Chairman Collin Peterson has $1.1 million in the bank after the first quarter of 2020. Seven months before the election, a sugar-backed PAC has already run several local ads supporting the Minnesota Democrat’s fight to keep his seat in a very red district.
— President Donald Trump and former Vice President Joe Biden have opposite stances on trade policy. Here’s a look at what changes may come in a Biden administration.
— Employees still clocking in during the time of social distancing and teleworking have filed thousands of worker safety complaints with the federal government, saying that they’re not properly equipped with protective gear.
HAPPY FRIDAY, APRIL 17! Welcome to Morning Ag, where your host wants to invite a goat to join our daily zoom team meetings. MA readers — nominate your favorite farm animals for a guest appearance! Send story ideas to [email protected] and @liz_crampton , and follow us @Morning_Ag .
POLITICO Pro is here to help you navigate these unprecedented times. Check out our new Covid-19 Coverage Roundup , which provides a daily summary of top Covid-19 news coverage from across all 16 federal policy verticals as well as premium content, such as DataPoint graphics. Please sign up at our settings page to receive this unique roundup sent directly to your inbox every weekday afternoon.
Sign up for POLITICO Nightly: Coronavirus Special Edition , your daily update on how the illness is affecting politics, markets, public health and more.
PETERSON STOCKS MONEY FOR REELECTION BID: Federal Election Commission filings are rolling in after Wednesday’s deadline. Peterson has pulled in $166,557 in contributions and has $1.1 million in cash on hand after the first quarter of 2020. He spent close to $70,000 in the first three months of the year.
The Minnesota Democrat who has been in office since 1990 is running to keep his seat in what’s expected to be a nail-biter of a race.
As of Thursday evening, there was no available information about Peterson’s anticipated top GOP challenger, Michelle Fischbach, or other opponents. (The Republican primary for the state is scheduled for Aug. 11). Stay tuned for an update on their fundraising and spending numbers.
Peterson may be in the fight of his life as he’s one of a few rural Democrats left on the Hill in an increasingly polarized nation, as yours truly has reported. Minnesota’s 7th Congressional District has shifted further right throughout his nearly three decades in office. It overwhelmingly voted for Trump in 2016.
Sugar high: Peterson has been a strong advocate for the sugar industry, and sugar beets are a key farming constituency in the rural district. A PAC bankrolled by the sugar lobby that is backing only Peterson this election cycle, Committee for Stronger Rural Communities, spent just over $112,000 during the first quarter and has about $250,000 on hand.
American Crystal Sugar is the PAC’s biggest donor, contributing $150,000 in early January, followed by the International Union of Operating Engineers, which gave $50,000 in February. Most of the PAC’s expenses have been on digital and video advertising: almost $103,000.
Early ads running on local Minnesota radiowaves and online tout Peterson’s support of gun rights and efforts to lower prescription drug costs, as well as his local farming background.
“When you grow up on a Minnesota farm, and start a small business from the ground up, there’s no time for partisan politics — just getting things done,” reads a radio ad. “That’s Collin Peterson — he’s lived it, firsthand.”
BIDEN-TRUMP TRADE BATTLE TEED UP FOR CAMPAIGN TRAIL: During the presidential race, Biden, former President Barack Obama’s No. 2, has the steep task of trying to win over blue-collar voters and progressives who have long been opposed to free trade agreements. Yet if Biden wins in November, it would mean a complete 180 from U.S. trade policy under Trump, writes Pro Trade’s Doug Palmer .
If elected, Biden is likely to take an ally-friendly approach, sharply contrasting with Trump’s strident nationalist attitude. When it comes to relations with China, experts say that Biden would build international coalitions to confront the country vs. Trump’s preference to go it alone against the global economic superpower.
Trade on backburner?: Don’t expect Biden to begin renegotiating trade deals as soon as he (hypothetically) enters office. He’s already said that domestic concerns take priority. And he will have to deal with lingering effects of the coronavirus outbreak and resulting economic crash.
Still, Biden would have a list of trade issues to deal with in short order, such as deciding what to do about Trump’s imposition of tariffs on more than $360 billion worth of Chinese goods and retaliatory duties that China as well as allies have imposed on U.S. exports.
Trump’s line of attack: It’s pretty much a given that Trump will go after Biden’s record on trade, particularly his support of the North American Free Trade Agreement and promotion of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Some analysts, however, doubt whether Trump could win over too much support by pounding Biden on such issues.
“In general, I don't think his vote three decades ago hurts him. But NAFTA is a symbol for the destruction wrought by globalization, so it continues to be a rallying cry,” Bruce Stokes, who just finished seven years at Pew Research Center surveying global attitudes on trade, told Doug.
CORONAVIRUS PROMPTS WORKER-SAFETY VIOLATIONS ALLEGATIONS: The Occupational Safety and Health Administration has received thousands of complaints against companies including grocery stores alleging workplaces safety violations, the Washington Post reports , citing records obtained by the Freedom of Information Act.
Grocery store workers, along with others employed along the food processing-and-distribution chain, have been classified by the federal government as “essential” workers who must stay on the job. But many say in the complaints that they’re concerned about a lack of access to protective equipment like masks and gloves. More than 3,000 complaints were filed from January to early April.
Food industry employees often work in close conditions and don’t have adequate health care coverage or paid time off. Edgar Fields, president of the Southeast Council of the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union, told the Post that a worker at a poultry plant in Camilla, Ga., filed a complaint to OSHA weeks ago, raising concerns about plant workers standing shoulder-to-shoulder on the assembly line.
Enforcement question: It’s unclear, however, whether the complaints will lead to any crackdowns. A former OSHA official told Pro Labor’s Rebecca Rainey that “OSHA told all workers that complained that they won't enforce CDC guidance.”
In related news: California will offer two weeks of supplemental paid sick leave to food industry workers who have contracted or been exposed to the coronavirus, Pro California’s Jeremy B. White writes .
— USDA is planning to spend nearly $2 billion to purchase agricultural commodities to help get surpluses to food banks, Pro Ag’s Helena Bottemiller Evich reports .
— Smithfield has closed two more meatpacking plants. One near Milwaukee is shutting for two weeks after a “small number” of employees testing positive for coronavirus. Another plant in Missouri is closed indefinitely in part because a shuttered Sioux Falls plant with more than 600 cases supplies it with hams, the AP reports.
— Farmworker advocacy groups sued Washington to prompt the state to issue emergency updates to health and safety standards for agricultural workers.
— USDA has approved hemp plans for Florida and Kansas, Pro Cannabis’ Mona Zhang reports . Florida aims to allow growing to begin April 27.
— Rural responses to coronavirus could be hurt by population loss. Two out of three rural counties have lost population over the last decade, according to a new report from Pew Charitable Trusts.
— Extreme wildfires are altering Western landscapes by lowering the quality of flower pollen, reducing organic carbon and microbiome activity in soil, and encouraging mature tree growth with forest management, High Country News reports.
— Land O’Lakes has removed the image of a Native American woman from its label, Modern Farmer reports.
