PM Narendra Modi takes stock of agri sector, discuses reforms to boost farmers income
PM Modi emphasised on reforms in agriculture marketing, management of marketable surplus, access of farmers to institutional credit and freeing agriculture sector of various restrictions with appropriate backing of statute.  He directed to further strengthen the role of FPOs to bring vibrancy in agrarian economy, transparency in agriculture trade and enable maximum benefits to the farmers.
PM Modi chairs key meeting on reforms in agriculture sector, discusses ways to increase farmers' income
NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi , on Saturday, held a meeting to discuss on the issues and reforms required in agriculture sector.
He emphasised on reforms in agriculture marketing, management of marketable surplus, access of farmers to institutional credit and freeing agriculture sector of various restrictions with appropriate backing of statute.
The Prime Minister directed to further strengthen the role of FPOs to bring vibrancy in agrarian economy, transparency in agriculture trade and enable maximum benefits to the farmers.
“Overall emphasis was on revisiting the existing laws governing market for better price realization and freedom of choice to the farmers,” said an agriculture ministry official.
The use of technology in the agriculture sector was also discussed as it has the potential to unlock the entire value chain for the benefit of our farmers.
“Prime Minister focused on the dissemination of technology till the last mile and making our farmers more competitive in the global value chain,” the official said.
The importance of making strategic interventions in the existing marketing eco-system was also highlighted bringing appropriate reforms in the context of rapid agricultural development.
“Roles of concessional credit flow to strengthen agriculture infrastructure, special Kisan Credit Card saturation drive for PM-Kisan beneficiaries and facilitating inter and intra-state trade of agriculture produce to ensure fairest return to farmer were some of the important areas covered were also deliberated,” the official said.
The Prime Minister also discussed steps to develop e-NAM into a platform of platforms to enable e-commerce.
“Discussions were also held on the possibilities of uniform statutory framework in the country to facilitate new ways for farming which will infuse capital and technology in agrarian economy,” the official said.
The prospects of bio-technological developments in crops or enhancement of productivity and reduction in input costs were also deliberated.
The Prime Minister also discussed the challenges of model land leasing act and how to protect the interest of small and marginal farmers.
“It was also deliberated how it is pertinent to make Essential Commodities Act compatible with present times so that large scale private investment in post-production agriculture infrastructure is incentivized and also has a positive effect on commodity derivative markets,” the official said.
The development of Brand India, creation of commodity specific Boards or Councils and promotion of Agri-Clusters and Contract Farming were key interventions that were discussed to boost Agriculture commodity export.
