One opportunity is in infant formula, as evidenced by success stories like A2 Milk. Rabobank analyst Michael Harvey puts this down to the value proposition of the product generally and individual brands.
“A2 have been very successful even before the coronavirus outbreak in terms of building a market and a brand with a multichannel strategy and value proposition,” he told Stockhead.
“It helps that they have easy access to the market and a strong value proposition.
“In the short term, discretionary items take a hit in price sensitive markets and you may see trading down. But some [companies] do well if they’re a comfort food or premium brand.
There are over a dozen small caps trying to crack the Asian market but for the time being the success stories are limited.
There are also small caps in seafood that are focused on exporting to Asia. These range from companies supplying conventional foods such as salmon and kingfish, to companies supplying some slightly more exotic options like sea cucumber and ling maw (bladder) .
New Zealand Coastal Seafoods (ASX:NZS), which sells ling maw, is the best performing food and agriculture stock this year. It has gained over 40 per cent.
One advantage for the sector generally, particularly New Zealand Coastal Seafoods, is that food companies are deemed an essential business, meaning those in the industry aren’t forced to close their doors during the pandemic.
The biggest seafood stock on the ASX is Tassal.
Last week Goldman Sachs tipped it to rise to $5.05 over the next 12 months, from $3.90 on Friday. The company remains on track to deliver on its production targets and has been boosted by favourable conditions.
Goldman Sachs also tipped fellow Tasmanian salmon firm Huon Aquaculture Group (ASX:HUO) for growth — to $4.50, from $3.85 on Friday.
Rabobank’s Harvey warns that although there is an opportunity in Asia, it is a crowded market.
“Clearly the opportunity for food and beverage in Asia is there given the fundamentals – big population bases, they’re not a surplus food producer and have consumers that want safe high-quality products,” he said.
“But it is also an opportunity for [firms] all around the world. There are companies in the UK, US and NZ wanting to enter too.
“Potentially longer term there might be more people using e-commerce; that might open up the opportunity for more firms to enter easier.”
Goldman Sachs has also warned that shortages in seasonal labour and export logistics may be challenging in the short term. However, the Morrison government has committed to spending $110m to subsidise airfreight for agricultural exports.
