Where would Popeye be without his can of spinach? It always looked so wholesome coming out of the can. But that was a long time ago.
Today, it’s all about freshness of the foods we consume. It’s part of our daily lives. Still, it’s not too much to ask just how fresh are the foods that we buy from our local supermarket in the city that we live.
Though that produce may come “fresh from the farm” that very morning, chances are that head of lettuce probably spent several hours on the road before reaching the local market.
By the time the produce is delivered and stacked in the grocery section of your local store, your greens would be more “fresh off the truck” than “fresh off the farm.”
If you live in a major metropolitan city, you know there are many miles between the farmland where your favorite produce is grown and your dinner table. It is a fact that on that journey from farm-to-fork,  these fresh greens drastically lose nutrients. And then there’s the pesticides used to keep your vegetables visually appealing. Not very appetizing, is it?
That’s why Hamburg-based &ever GmbH (formerly Farmers Cut) is radically rethinking agriculture by combining the benefits of the best local farms with advances made possible by technology to grow, produce, and harvest food within major metro areas.
It is &ever’s global ambition to build a highly scalable and flexible solution for up to 800 farms (in urban population centers) in roughly 20 countries to manage the entire supply chain of fresh greens.
&ever saw the need to provide people living in urban centers with fresh greens while reducing the consumption of natural resources. Its mission is to revolutionize the agricultural landscape for specific regions too far separated from the farming community by building vertical indoor farmhouses in the largest metropolises of the world.
To help make this a reality, the company developed a software solution that enabled untrained workers to safely run a vertical indoor farm – from seeding to harvesting to shipping – via SAP Fiori apps and SAP Leonardo AI services to constantly optimize cultivation practices based on farm performance parameters.
Numerous sensors provide information such as CO2 saturation (less CO2 emission = more nutrients), humidity, lighting, air flow, and temperature to an SAP HANA database where sensor data is combined with master data of different facilities such as best seed density, ideal germination hours, and more. By intelligently combining these data sets, &ever is able to optimize the output of its indoor farms. AI algorithms also help reduce the consumption of natural resources by improving the capacity of the farm.
&ever went live with its solution in 2018 (at the time under the name of Farmers Cut), and the outcome has been dramatic. &ever was able to establish a sustainable and environmentally friendly production of fresh and healthy greens in a highly efficient manner. This resulted in:
Standardized processes were developed that could easily be adapted to local needs and regulations via the SAP Cloud Platform. Cost savings were also realized by using existing real estate located in various city centers.
&ever has successfully planted the seed for sustainable cultivation of healthier food for the urban population through technology – constantly improving its production processes based on historical data and predictions. “SAP technology enables us to revolutionize the food supply chain by bringing farmhouses closer to the customers in the biggest cities in the world,” said Dr. Jan-Gerd Frerichs, CTO at &ever.
Now, there won’t be any reason (or excuse) for city residents to not eat fresh, home-grown, pollutant-free greens – just like your mom always told you to do.
