Russian President Vladimir Putin chairs a meeting on Feb. 13, 2020.
With the exchange-traded fund down by a third since Feb. 20, and the ruble off 20% against the dollar, Russia looks like a prime spot for investors to buy amid the fallout of the coronavirus pandemic.
“Russia at a headline level is one of the most attractive places on the planet to invest now,” says Justin Leverenz, chief investment officer for developing market equities at Invesco.
There’s just one problem: It may take a year or two to come to pass.
Fixed income in the land of President Vladimir Putin offers a similar scenario, says Aaron Hurd, senior currency portfolio manager at State Street Global Advisors.
He sees the ruble bouncing from its current level near 80 to the dollar to 60 or 65 over the next two years, driving returns of up to 40% in local bond markets. His caveat: a “real possibility of another 10% loss in the ruble before it recovers.”
Plunging valuations are not the only reason to like Russian investments. As fears of a credit crunch spread across emerging markets, Moscow looks ironclad. It has accrued some $700 billion in cash reserves since the last oil collapse, in 2014-15.
The current account stays positive down to a $30-a-barrel oil price, and oil companies retain positive Ebitda (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) at $25, says Roman Lokhov, chief executive officer of Moscow-founded BCS Global Markets.
Brent crude was trading just under $30 on March 26, down more than half on the year.
“Russia has been preparing for a shock like this for the last five years,” Lokhov says.
The macroeconomic armor will let Putin prevail in the oil war he helped launch three weeks ago by walking away from an output-limitation pact with the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Nations, Leverenz argues.
Higher-cost and highly leveraged U.S. shale producers will have to slash production while Russia lives off its savings. “They had the shale industry’s head underwater in 2015; now they can drown it,” he says.
Russian companies have also been swept by a quiet governance revolution that has transformed them into some of the better dividend payers in emerging markets, notes David Aserkoff, J.P. Morgan’s chief of equity strategy for emerging Europe.
Average dividend yields of 7.5% to 8% helped push Russian stocks up by a third last year even with choppy oil prices, he says. Today, those yields are in the 11% to 12% range. “Russian companies have changed the way they do business,” says Aserkoff. “The market only rerated for that a little bit.”
Still, he’s hesitant about pouncing on Russian stocks like dividend champ Lukoi l (LKOD.UK), natural-gas producer Novatek (NVTK.UK), or Yandex (YNDX), which is the combined Google and Uber of Russia. “Russia will be an excellent buying opportunity at some point soon,” Aserkoff says. “We wonder whether that point is today.”
Justin Leverenz is “investing a little more on the margins” in his Russian holdings. These include Novatek and Yandex, along with financial giant Sberbank (SBER.UK).
“This is one of the most attractive traditional banks in the world, trading at five to six times earnings and [with] a 10% dividend yield,” he says.
Just don’t count on a quick buck, BCS’ Lokhov warns. As prepared as Russia may be for a perfect storm of Covid-19 and oil-price depression , the full gale hasn’t hit it yet.
“There’s generally little visibility on what’s going to happen in the short term,” he concludes.
With the  exchange-traded fund down by a third since Feb.
