There’s Gold in Salmon. Here’s How to Play the Boom.
Salmon is increasingly in demand from health-conscious consumers around the world. Yet the salmon industry remains unfamiliar to U.S. investors because it is centered in Norway , where more than half of the world’s farmed salmon is produced.
The industry’s growth prospects look good, thanks to annual demand growth in the mid-single digits, largely unpenetrated markets in Asia, and salmon’s small market share relative to meat.
The combined market value of the 10 leading companies is around $30 billion, comparable in size to the top U.S. meat producer, Tyson Foods (ticker: TSN). The Oslo bourse is the main market for the major producers. The industry leader, Mowi (MOWI.Norway), has a market value of $13 billion and is the only one with liquid U.S. shares (MHGVY), which trade around $25. Other leading salmon producers include SalMar (SALM.Norway) and Lerøy Seafood Group (LSG.Norway). The stocks trade for an average of 17 times projected 2019 earnings and yield an average of 4%, reflecting high dividend payout ratios.
“There is huge potential for the salmon industry,” says David Marcus , manager of the Evermore Global Value fund (EVGBX). “As the world gets wealthier, people want to eat healthier and that means more salmon.”
Note: $1 USD = 9.20 Norwegian Kroner (NOK); E=Estaimte; N/A=Not applicable
More than three million metric tons of salmon—both farm-raised and wild—are produced annually, against more than 100 million tons each for poultry and pork. Beef is about 60 million tons. Supply is expected to grow at a modest 5% annual pace in the next five years because of regulation on new farms in Norway and other major producing countries.
Salmon costs more than most cuts of meat, which is a brake on demand. The wholesale price of farm-raised salmon is about 55 Norwegian kroner per kilo, or about $3 per pound. A krone is worth about 11 cents.
While foodies may prefer wild Chinook , most of the U.S. market is supplied by farm-raised salmon that arrives fresh or frozen by air. Indeed, more than 70% of the global salmon market is farm raised, largely in cold sea waters, like those off Norway, as well as off Chile, Scotland, and Iceland.
Like the meat business, the salmon industry has practices that have come under scrutiny. Salmon farms use netted cages that can measure 90 feet across and 30 to 50 feet deep. While profitable—leading companies often reporting operating profit margins of 15% or higher—the crowded pens can be a breeding ground for sea lice, which attack and kill salmon, and deadly algae blooms.
One company, Atlantic Sapphire (ASAME.Norway), has positioned itself as an eco-friendly alternative, and it has been the hottest salmon stock this year. Using saltwater and fresh water pumped from large underground aquifers, Atlantic Sapphire is raising salmon in large tanks and aims to target the U.S. market. It plans to begin production next year at the world’s largest onshore facility near Miami.
“This could be the most sustainable way to produce protein in the world,” says CEO Johan Andreassen. “Salmon is mostly imported into the U.S. It leaves an enormous carbon footprint and is costly.” Transportation costs are about $1 per pound.
Atlantic Sapphire’s thinly traded shares are up 57% this year to 108 Norwegian kroner, giving it a market value of $800 million. Marcus thinks it could generate $90 million of annual earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization by 2022 and more than double that by 2026.
The company has raised salmon using a similar technology at a Danish plant. Now, it needs to demonstrate that it works on a larger scale. The Florida site has both salt and fresh water and the ability to send wastewater down thousands of feet into the ground. “I can make a bold statement that we will have zero impact on coastal areas and the ocean,” Andreassen says.
He says the company may consider a U.S. listing, which would boost its profile, especially with ESG-focused investors. The University of Michigan endowment is one of its largest holders.
Mowi benefits from vertical integration, scale, geographic diversification, and a well-regarded management team. Its results—and those of rivals—have been uneven, however, because of cost and price swings. Spot salmon prices recently hit a four-year low of 47 kroner per kilo due to high supply growth in the third quarter before rallying to a recent 54 kroner. This past week, Mowi said third-quarter operating profit fell almost 30%. Still, Mowi says it is “positioned for further profitable growth” as it plans to expand salmon volume by 11% this year, to 430,000 metric tons, and by 5% in 2020.
Marcus is partial to Salmones Camanchaca (SALMON.Norway), a leading Chilean producer. Its shares, at 66 kroner, are off 20% this year. Harvest volumes and profits fell sharply in the second quarter because of sea lice and algae blooms. “The valuation is so attractive that it factors in issues like sea lice, which is an industry problem,” Marcus says. Salmones Camanchaca trades for about eight times projected 2020 earnings, a discount to the group average of 13 and yields almost 5%.
There’s Gold in Salmon. Here’s How to Play the Boom.
Salmon is increasingly in demand from health-conscious consumers around the world.
