Trade resumption is important for U.S. agriculture, analyst says
U.S. economy/pandemic situation trumps fundamental factors.
We are finally seeing the COVID-19 pandemic starting to shrink with fewer new infections daily than the previous day, meaning in 14 days we will have fewer infected people to spread it going forward.
The drastic social distancing programs implemented across the world are starting to show some response. As spring arrives, it likely will diminish even more so the restart of economic activity shut down by social distancing can begin again.
How quickly the economy recovers is quite important – and for agriculture, how quickly trade resumes is quite important (corn is about one sixth exported, soybeans and wheat, 50%).
For corn, how quickly energy consumption resumes near normal activity (if ever) is also important.
The coronavirus now has at least 1,930,780 infections worldwide (up 71,769), with 120,450 deaths (+5,471), yet the social distancing strategy is working around the world. That might be the good news, and the bad news as that means social distancing will be a part of many lives until a vaccine or better approach is found. For now, the West cannot seem to find any tactic other than a shutdown of 29% of our economy to stop the virus from spreading.
For now, the growth rate is not only slowing, but new infections are also dropping each day, so that means the problem is getting smaller, not larger. That is a huge victory for those in the health industry as now they can probably handle the new cases into the summer (which will likely shrink the number of infections, as well).
For this winter/spring season, we’ve likely dodged the bullet, so to speak. But next fall, the same issues will emerge with colder weather/flu season, and it’s likely that fall and winter sports/crowd
The futures market seems to be dismissing the Saudi/Russian crude oil agreement to shrink oil supplies as prices are going back down to near lows, now just a few dollars from it. With the prospect of start-up of near-normal life just a month or two away, that might be a short-lived decline.
There is snow in Texas, Oklahoma, and Kansas this week as the cold weather is across the U.S. today, with well-below-normal temps likely to hang around for another week or so. The next seven days will also be dry, though, with the cold weather. The eight- to 14-day forecast warms a bit to near normal, and precip amounts increase to above normal for the southern half of the U.S., but remain below normal for the northwest Corn Belt.
Could something actually be planted in April this year?
So far, planting progress in nearly as pathetic as last year, with only 3% of corn planted (same as last year and 1% behind normal), 9% cotton planted (3% ahead of normal), 18% sorghum planted (1% ahead), and 21% of rice planted (10% behind).
The soil is almost as saturated as last year at 92% adequate/surplus (2% behind last year), with subsoil 91% adequate/surplus (also 2% behind last year). It’s unlikely that planting will go as horrible as last year, but we still might have significant prevented-plant acres this year (maybe the second-worst ever). The last half of April and May’s weather determines most everything about the planting season, but a slow start and saturated soils are not what we wanted to begin the year.
It's become extremely difficult to do a market assessment for ag products, without first assessing the state of the U.S. economy/pandemic situation.
For example, the April USDA report made a number of big changes (huge corn demand cuts, big South American soybean production cuts) and the market couldn’t care less. Prices hardly budged when the USDA report came out last Thursday. Probably because it didn’t matter – the state of the
world and U.S. economy/impacts from COVID-19 were far more important than USDA’s report.
The problem for U.S. agriculture is that the world is becoming less and less global due to COVID-19. With the U.S. exporting one sixth of our corn, and 50% of our wheat/soybeans, less global is a bad thing; we need the export markets. So, any tendency to import less hurts U.S. agriculture – and the market knows it.
On the other hand, we can’t seem to keep pasta, dry beans, eggs, milk, and bread on U.S. grocery shelves the past few months. That feeling of being unable to buy products you want is something the rest of the world is far more familiar with than the U.S. So the need to import food from
the U.S. is indeed a very strong and important need – perhaps more important than anything else. We need to make sure we remember to take care of our customers’ needs the way we would care for our own children.
We do not want to give any customer an excuse not to buy from the U.S. – especially in these difficult times.
Ray is President of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc., a top Ranked marketing firm in the country.
This material has been prepared by a sales or trading employee or agent of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc. and is, or is in the nature of, a solicitation. This material is not a research report prepared by Progressive Ag Marketing's Research Department. By accepting this communication, you agree that you are an experienced user of the futures markets, capable of making independent trading decisions, and agree that you are not, and will not, rely solely on this communication in making trading decisions.
DISTRIBUTION IN SOME JURISDICTIONS MAY BE PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED BY LAW. PERSONS IN POSSESSION OF THIS COMMUNICATION INDIRECTLY SHOULD INFORM THEMSELVES ABOUT AND OBSERVE ANY SUCH PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTIONS. TO THE EXTENT THAT YOU HAVE RECEIVED THIS COMMUNICATION INDIRECTLY AND SOLICITATIONS ARE PROHIBITED IN YOUR JURISDICTION WITHOUT REGISTRATION, THE MARKET COMMENTARY IN THIS COMMUNICATION SHOULD NOT BE CONSIDERED A SOLICITATION.
The risk of loss in trading futures and/or options is substantial and each investor and/or trader must consider whether this is a suitable investment. Past performance, whether actual or indicated by simulated historical tests of strategies, is not indicative of future results. Trading advice is based on information taken from trades and statistical services and other sources that Progressive Ag Marketing believes are reliable. We do not guarantee that such information is accurate or complete and it should not be relied upon as such. Trading advice reflects our good faith judgment at a specific time and is
subject to change without notice. There is no guarantee that advice we give will result in profitable trades.
