As COVID-19 makes headlines and heightens uncertainty around the country, farmers and others in rural America are looking for answers. The new coronavirus has been disruptive to markets as well as farm families’ lifestyles.
Congress allotted $23.5 billion for agriculture in the coronavirus relief package, but "that amount of money will not sustain" the farm sector, said Zippy Duvall, American Farm Bureau Federation president.
Farmers who sell directly to the public or institutions are especially concerned about market closures.
David Newman of Missouri sells 95% of his pork to the restaurant industry, which has been hit hard by the pandemic. He says demand has still been good as restaurants have moved to take out and delivery options, but the situation has added new logistics challenges.
“Farmers markets are essential activities for the economic livelihood of farmers and for food access for millions of Americans,” says Ben Feldman, executive director of the Farmers Market Coalition. “The closure of markets has the potential to bankrupt farmers and force people to go without food.”
Low interest rates have been dropped further creating an opportunity for some farmers to refinance. After a phone call and a bit of paperwork with his banker, Indiana farmer Brian Scott is on track to save $100,000 in the next four years by refinancing one farmland loan and his home mortgage.
The Farm Credit Administration has urged the institutions in its system to work with farmers who have been affected by COVID-19. These institutions may be able to alleviate stress for farmers by extending the terms of loan repayments, restructuring borrowers’ debt obligations, or easing some loan documentation or credit-extension terms of new loans to certain borrowers.
READ MORE: Will COVID-19 be a small shadow compared with economic downturn to come?
At the beginning of the month, some ethanol producers worldwide said demand was up for their products as people stockpiled hand sanitizer, which can be made from the biofuel.
Now, fewer Americans are driving to work, school, and events amid the outbreak. This could have a dramatic negative impact on corn demand by the U.S. ethanol oil industry, says Todd Hubbs of the Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics at the University of Illinois.
COVID-19 is also creating supply chain concerns for farmers around the country. Iowa pig farmer Katherine Marcano-Bell says, “We worry about plants shutting down and us having to keep pigs for a longer period of time.”
Although the plant is not closing, the first confirmed case of a slaughterhouse worker infected with COVID-19 was reported Monday at a Mississippi poultry processing plant.
In a tweet last week, Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue said, “Food supply is sound, it’s stable & there’s plenty of food available. To the folks working in grocery stores & driving trucks full of products: Y’all are the heroes in the food supply chain.”
READ MORE: The COVID-19 virus and U.S. agriculture’s supply chain concerns
Many farm families with school-age children now must juggle childcare along with the usual farm chores. This may require relying on family members who normally work on the farm or are of higher risk for the virus.
For Marcano-Bell, labor issues are top of mind as COVID-19 shutters businesses and schools in the state. Her family does the work on the farm themselves.
