Regenerative food and farming company Wide Open Agriculture (WOA) grew its quarterly revenue by 46 per cent in the quarter ending on December 31 2019.
The December 2019 quarter was significant in bringing in $290,000. This is nearly double the revenue achieved in the previous quarter.
These results are the highest in the company's history and bring total sales for the first half of the 2020 financial year to $490,000.
Importantly, these sales were made only in Western Australia to premium restaurants, food-service customers, independent retailers and online consumers.
At the start of the 2020 financial year, Wide Open kicked off domestic sales of its regeneratively produced meat.
Its food brand, Dirty Clean Food, is Australia's first regenerative food brand. It's the first to provide conscious consumers with ethically sourced meat and plant-based products.
"Our rapid and substantial growth in sales validates the immense demand for regenerative food products. Our growth also confirms our capacity to provide premium products with a clear line of sight from regenerative paddock-to-plate," Managing Director Dr. Ben Cole said.
During the quarter, a number of leading retailers stocked Dirty Clean Food's products. These include Farmer Jacks, IGA, Boatshed, Peaches, Loose Produce, Fresh Provisions and Perth Organics.
Between June and December 2019, restaurant customers' sales grew by 64 per cent. Over 55 of these are regulars from premium restaurants and food service outlets.
Repeat customers include Cape Lodge in Yallingup, Rockpool at the Crown Casino, Yarri in Dunsborough and Young George in East Fremantle.
While Wide Open offers a direct-to-consumer online sales channel, the company stocked its products on the retailers' shelves in early December .
In addition to domestic sales, the agriculturalist secured a meat export licence in October . This licensee presented a new pathway to go global with its premium meat products. 2
Wide Open expects further demand for its products this year. It's currently in discussions with various large-scale outlets who support the consumer demand for sustainably-produced food.
Currently, the company has a few products that are under development. These include hemp seeds, granola, lupin falafel mix and oat milk.
Wide Open is up 25 per cent and shares are trading for 15 cents each at 11:40 am AEDT.
