We need to confirm your email address.
To complete the process, please follow the instructions in the email we just sent you.
There was a problem processing your submission. Please try again later.
A diagnosis by the Public Accounts Committee recently unearthed shocking details where orders where given to officials at the Ministry of Finance to process payments to various shadowy entities.
Recently, Accountant General, Daniel Muchemwa conceded that the program was hurriedly done without proper laid down accounting procedures.
Analysts have however welcomed the development although they insist the government should not take a leading role.
"It's a welcome development now that the government is opening up for private sector participation in agriculture. But the government should not take a leading part in this instead it should just provide the framework that excites banks and companies to engage with farmers on their own terms on commercial basis not with the government in the picture. Agriculture should just be totally private sector driven because we have seen in the past what happens when the state is in control," economic analyst, Pepukai Chivore weighed in.
There are fears that government interference might frustrate private players in financing the program with lessons from the past pointing to selective identification of beneficiaries along political lines.
Copyright © 2019 263Chat . All rights reserved. Distributed by AllAfrica Global Media ( allAfrica.com ).
To contact the copyright holder directly for corrections — or for permission to republish or make other authorized use of this material, click here.
AllAfrica publishes around 800 reports a day from more than 140 news organizations and over 500 other institutions and individuals , representing a diversity of positions on every topic. We publish news and views ranging from vigorous opponents of governments to government publications and spokespersons. Publishers named above each report are responsible for their own content, which AllAfrica does not have the legal right to edit or correct.
Articles and commentaries that identify allAfrica.com as the publisher are produced or commissioned by AllAfrica . To address comments or complaints, please Contact us .
AllAfrica is a voice of, by and about Africa - aggregating, producing and distributing 800 news and information items daily from over 140 African news organizations and our own reporters to an African and global public. We operate from Cape Town, Dakar, Abuja, Johannesburg, Nairobi and Washington DC.
