James Mickleboro | June 7, 2020 10:47am | More on: NDQ VAE VGS
If you’re looking to add some international diversity to your portfolio, then using exchange traded funds (ETFs) is a quick way to do this.
But which ETFs should you buy? There certainly is a lot of choice when it comes to ETFs. To narrow things down, I’ve picked out three that I think would be great additions to most portfolios.
Here’s why I think they are worth considering:
BetaShares NASDAQ 100 ETF (ASX: NDQ)
This first option to consider buying is the BetaShares NASDAQ 100 ETF. This ETF is an easy way for investors to gain exposure to the famous NASDAQ 100 index. This index is filled to the brim with household names from a wide range of industries. These include the likes of Amazon, Costco, Facebook, Starbucks, and video conferencing company, Zoom. I believe the majority of the companies on the index have very bright outlooks. As such, I wouldn’t be surprised to see the Nasdaq 100 continue to outperform the ASX 200 over the next decade.
Vanguard MSCI Index International Shares ETF (ASX: VGS)
Another option that gives investors exposure to international shares is the Vanguard MSCI Index International Shares ETF. In fact, this ETF gives investors to some of the biggest companies in the world. The fund is invested in a total of 1,579 listed companies across major developed countries. Its holdings include the likes of Apple, Nestle, Proctor & Gamble, and Google parent, Alphabet
Vanguard FTSE Asia ex Japan Shares Index ETF (ASX: VAE)
A final option for investors to consider buying is the Vanguard FTSE Asia ex Japan Shares Index ETF. It give investors exposure to some of the biggest and best companies in the Asia market (excluding Japan). In total the ETF is invested in over 1,250 shares across the continent. These include the likes of Tencent, Alibaba, and Samsung. Given how quickly the Asian economy is expected to grow in the future, I believe these companies are well-positioned for growth. This could lead to the ETF outperforming the ASX 200 in the future.
We hear it over and over from investors, "I wish I had bought Altium or Afterpay when they were first recommended by The Motley Fool. I'd be sitting on a gold mine!" And it's true.
And while Altium and Afterpay have had a good run, we think these 5 other stocks are screaming buys . And you can buy them now for less than $5 a share!
Motley Fool contributor James Mickleboro has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool Australia owns shares of and has recommended BETANASDAQ ETF UNITS. The Motley Fool Australia has recommended Vanguard MSCI Index International Shares ETF. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy . This article contains general investment advice only (under AFSL 400691). Authorised by Scott Phillips.
