James Mickleboro | June 19, 2020 7:47am | More on: NDQ NXT SEK
If you’re interested in building your wealth, then I believe that thinking long term is the best way to do it.
This is because by investing with a long time horizon, you can benefit from the power of compounding.
This is essentially earning a return on your return, which accelerates the process. It explains why $50,000 generating an annual return of 10% per annum would turn into ~$130,000 in 10 years.
With that in mind, I have picked out three ASX shares that I believe could provide strong returns for investors over the next decade and beyond:
BetaShares NASDAQ 100 ETF (ASX: NDQ)
I think the BetaShares NASDAQ 100 ETF is well worth considering. It provides investors with exposure to the 100 largest non-financial shares on the NASDAQ. This includes behemoths such as Amazon, Facebook, and Microsoft. As I believe the majority of the companies on this index have the potential to grow at a quicker rate than the global economy, I expect the ETF to provide investors with strong returns for many years to come.
Another ASX share I would suggest you look at is NEXTDC. It is a leading Data Centre-as-a-Service provider with a portfolio of world class centres in key locations across Australia. I believe the company is perfectly positioned for growth thanks to the structural shift to the cloud. Another positive is its recent $672 million equity raising , which will strengthen its balance sheet and fund its strategic expansion plans.
I think this job listings company would be a top option for investors. While I’m a big fan of its ANZ business, I think its rapidly growing China-based Zhaopin business is the real reason to invest. In the first half Zhaopin contributed 47.8% of SEEK’s total revenue, compared with 25.6% by the ANZ business. Given how lucrative the China market is, I expect Zhaopin to underpin strong growth for many years once the crisis passes.
And here are more quality shares which could generate strong returns for investors in the 2020s...
We hear it over and over from investors, "I wish I had bought Altium or Afterpay when they were first recommended by The Motley Fool. I'd be sitting on a gold mine!" And it's true.
And while Altium and Afterpay have had a good run, we think these 5 other stocks are screaming buys . And you can buy them now for less than $5 a share!
Motley Fool contributor James Mickleboro owns shares of NEXTDC Limited and SEEK Limited. The Motley Fool Australia owns shares of and has recommended BETANASDAQ ETF UNITS. The Motley Fool Australia has recommended SEEK Limited. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy . This article contains general investment advice only (under AFSL 400691). Authorised by Scott Phillips.
