Dow Rallies as Nasdaq 100 Drops - Swapping Trends or Topping Out?
So far this week, those fortunes have flipped as the Nasdaq is working on its second consecutive down-day while the Dow has, so far, rallied through both sessions.
Is this observation a sign of a top or is this more of a re-load scenario for the Nasdaq 100 as the laggard Dow continues to be bid?
It’s been a fairly amazing past two months across US equity markets. After US equity indices lost more than a third of their value in a little over a month, an onslaught of government stimulus programs have helped to not only reverse the trend but to push US stocks right back towards those prior all-time-highs. And with low rates for the foreseeable future combined with a Central Bank that’s very willing to do what’s needed to keep financial markets running smoothly, such as Jerome Powell highlighting that there’s ‘no limit’ to what the Fed can do with the lending programs available – it appears that the fear that had driven into markets so aggressively just a couple of months ago has now faded away.
And to be sure, there’s much to be optimistic about. In the, US a number of areas are beginning to reopen in anticipation of the summer. The recent Memorial Day weekend went through without any nasty headline surprises, as we’d become accustomed to over the past couple of months; and there’s even hope for a vaccine sooner rather than later, given investors and traders a number of reasons to continue driving stock prices higher.
But one key observation cannot go unnoticed, and that’s the fact that so far this week, the high-flying Nasdaq 100 has cooled considerably even as the Dow Jones Industrial Average has continued to rise. Until recently, this was very much the opposite scenario – as the tech-heavy Nasdaq out-performed the DJIA both on the way down in February-March and on the way back up in the two months since.
To make this an apples-to-apples comparison: From the February highs down to the March lows, the Nasdaq 100 lost approximately 32.05%. The Dow lost 38.5% over the same period of time. And on the way back up – the tech-heavy Nasdaq 100 continued to outperform, rising by as much as 44.9% while the Dow has rallied by as much as 39.7%. Neither of those two-month-return numbers are anything to sneeze at – but it does clearly illustrate how the Nasdaq has continued to outperform the Dow over the past couple of months – until this week, at least.
