The best of the market in a Schaeffer's 5-minute weekly read.
 up over up over 380 points this morning thanks to big pre-market surges in the airline and cruise sectors. Successful reopening measures in China are also boosting investor sentiment, and giving U.S.-listed Chinese stocks a lift as well. Both S&P 500 Index (SPX) and Nasdaq-100 Index (NDX) futures are also higher, as the latter looks to notch even more highs during today's session.
Continue reading for more on today's market, including:
            higher on a bull note.
Plus, Oracle of Omaha strikes billion-dollar deal; NFLX gets diversity points; and Citigroup likes HOG.
The Cboe Options Exchange (CBOE) saw 1.44 million call contracts traded on Thursday, and 736,859 put contracts. The single-session equity put/call ratio rose to 0.51, and the 21-day moving average rose to 0.52.
Dominion Energy Inc (NYSE:D) is slightly lower ahead of the bell, after selling its gas assets to Warren Buffets' Berkshire Hathaway for $4 billion. The firm also dissolved its $8 billion Atlantic Coast pipeline deal with Duke
            Energy on surging costs and legal delays. At last glance, D is down 0.9% at $81.80, set to snap a four-day win streak.
The New York Times said Netflix Inc (NASDAQ:NFLX) had a large library of Black content well before other streaming services, many of which are now racing to diversify their libraries. The FAANG stock is up 0.4% this morning to trade at $478.90.
Citigroup just initiated coverage on Harley-Davidson Inc (NYSE:HOG) with a "buy" rating and a $33 price target -- a 40% premium to Thursday's close. The analyst said the motorcycle stock was attractively valued, and predicted significant turnaround with the company's new CEO. HOG is up 4.5%
            at $23.44 ahead of the open.
 Markit services PMI and the ISM non-manufacturing index.
Stocks in Asia closed higher today, after a sudden surge in trading volume and a breakout for the Shanghai composite improved investor outlook. A possible reason for the uptick in volume is the continent being less affected by the coronavirus
            outbreak at the moment. China’s Shanghai Composite rose 5.7%, leading the charge, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng also saw robust gains and rose 3.8%. Meanwhile, Japan’s Nikkei and South Korea’s Kospi  rose 1.8% and
Across the pond, stocks in Europe are also bouncing back, as investor focus on the prospect of economic recovery and cheer the approval of widely known COVID-19 treatment, remdesivir. At last check, London’s FTSE 100 and the CAC 40 in France are 1.8% higher. Elsewhere, the German DAX was last seen up 1.9%.
A Schaeffer's 39th Anniversary Exclusive!
Access your FREE insider report before it's too late!
