For traders News and features Analysis Nasdaq 100 analysis: is now the time to sell short?
The Nasdaq 100 Index hit new all-time highs above 10,000 points this week, defying expectations of weakness amid the disruption to economic activity caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.
The index comprises 100 of the largest non-financial companies listed on the Nasdaq Stock Market in the US and as such is heavy on technology stocks – including the industry's mammoths such as Apple (AAPL) , Alphabet’s Google (GOOGL) , Intel (INTC) and Tesla (TSLA) . The index has soared by 45 per cent from the March lows and has gained 14 per cent since the start of the year. That leaves investors wondering: is the rally sustainable or is it time to sell short?
This Nasdaq analysis recaps the recent moves on the market and looks at the direction it could take next. Scroll down for a video in which David Jones, chief market strategist at Capital.com, uses Nasdaq 100 technical analysis to suggest a potential short-term trade to take advantage of the market’s volatility.
Few investors expected to see the Nasdaq at all-time high levels just two months after the harsh sell-off in March – particularly as the global economy remains under pressure with countries still under partial lockdowns to reduce the spread of Covid-19. The Nasdaq 100 was the first of the three major US indices to return to the record highs reached in February.
Nasdaq price analysis shows that the index shed 30 per cent of its value in late March, slipping below the 7,000 mark as more and more countries began to enter government-ordered lockdowns. That erased the gains of the previous year, only a few weeks after it had hit a record high above 9,800 in late February.
The March IHS Markit purchasing managers’ index (PMI) sank to 49.2 in March, indicating a contraction in activity. But while it sank to 36.1 in April, the lowest since the previous financial crisis in 2009, and came in at 39.8 in May, the Nasdaq 100 rapidly bounced up heading into April. The index climbed steadily in April and May and set a new intraday record of 10,151 on June 10 – its third consecutive day of breaching its previous record highs.
While the lockdowns brought business to a halt in some industries, technology companies that offer products and services enabling people to work and play at home have excelled, in turn driving the technology-heavy Nasdaq 100 Index higher. The stock markets have been looking forward, anticipating a quick so-called V-shaped recovery, and pricing in a return to pre-crisis activity.
The broader US and international stock markets have also gained from central bank policies, as zero or negative real interest rates and unlimited asset-buying programmes have encouraged investors to keep buying stocks. The US Federal Reserve has reiterated several times in the past two months that it will continue to use the tools at its disposal to support the economy.
An unexpected fall in US unemployment figures for the end of May, despite issues with the numbers being understated, further buoyed sentiment at the start of June. In its May jobs report, the US Department of Labour noted that the unemployment rate would have been 16.3 per cent rather than the official figure of 13.3 per cent if not for a data collection error. The figure for April was 14.7 per cent. US non-farm payrolls increased by 2.5 million in May, contrary to expectations for a decline of as much as 7.5 million.
Watch this Nasdaq technical analysis video with Capital.com’s chief market strategist, David Jones, as he reviews the Nasdaq 100 price chart and uses the technical indicators to set up a potential trading position.
What comes next for the Nasdaq 100: proceed with caution
With the Nasdaq 100 interest touching the 10,000 psychological level for the first time, the market has reached a key point at which it could either accelerate to new highs or pull back sharply. The RSI has been hovering around overbought in recent weeks and the MACD has been relatively flat since March, but the index remains above its 50-day and 200-day moving averages. There is support on the way down at 8,850 and given the strength of the market in recent months, the price trend suggests buying the dips rather than going short.
Analysts’ recent Nasdaq forecast for the short term reiterates that the market will likely remain volatile in the coming months.
Citibank (C) is cautious on the potential for US markets to extend much further. “Central banks can remove much of the downside but for global equities to make sustainable new highs, global EPS [earnings per share] need to make sustainable new highs. That prospect seems years away,” analysts at the bank said in a recent research note. “We can’t help thinking that the current rally is eating into potential future returns. Our instinct is to resist chasing the current rally.”
“Although the jobs report was better than expected, unemployment is still extremely high, labour market recovery will likely be slow and not linear and the unemployment rate could remain in double digits at the end of 2020, challenging the exuberance of the equity market,” analysts at J.P. Morgan (JPM) said.
On the other hand, asset management firm Raymond James (RJF) views volatility in the Nasdaq as healthy consolidation for the market to digest its gains, as it has recently run ahead of fundamentals. “We continue to view the positives, such as an enormous fiscal and monetary response, as outweighing the potential negatives (e.g., the election, U.S./China trade rhetoric, virus resurgence),” said senior portfolio strategist Joey Madere.
Pullbacks are to be expected, Madere said, particularly following the dramatic rally over the past 50+ days. There have previously been only three periods since the 1930s to record gains of more than 25 per cent over 50 days – 2009, 1982 and 1975 – all of which were coming out of recessionary bear markets and saw short-term pullbacks within the following month or two. All three were followed by above-average returns over the subsequent 12 months, Madere noticed.
