Nasdaq 100, Crude Oil and EURAUD Talking Points:
Head-and-shoulders patterns are one of the most often talked about patterns, likely because it is considered a reversal backdrop
While the simple pattern can present the progress towards an eventual market turn, traders would do well to find further backing before following turns
We look at head-and-shoulders patterns that can be seen on the likes of the Nasdaq 100, crude oil and EURAUD (which is an inverse pattern)
Significant market reversals are the market development that many traders spend the bulk of their time pursuing whether through technical or fundamental staging. However, markets spend far more time committed to trend and/or holding to congestion. That disconnect between probabilities and appetites can often lead to pain. Yet, markets do turn. So, how can we better position ourselves to sort the merely appealing staging of familiar chart patterns to something that better approximates to a genuine shift in the mass’s conviction?
As far as false hopes go, the head-and-shoulders pattern sought after in charts across regions and asset classes may be one of the biggest offenders. Some pursue them doggedly while others may write them off all together. Personally, I think the pattern is like any other indicator: it should be one part of a more comprehensive analysis. There is great debate over how acute the technical picture has to be in order to qualify this pattern along with a host of criteria. However, I take a more lax view of the pattern as a staging ground for a turn given that I will apply additional factors of ‘authentication’ for a genuine trend. So long as there is a correction from a high (left shoulder), higher high (head) and lower high (right shoulder) with a reasonably clean support (neckline); I will take a closer look. So let’s take a look at three such patterns which qualify in my book – and where they need additional technical or fundamental progress to verify progress.
First up is the tech-heavy US index, the Nasdaq 100. This is generally highly correlated to the Dow and S&P 500 , but this particularly buoyant benchmark has gone the extra mile this month to hit a new record high. That high happens to also coincide with what can be considered a ‘head’ on a H&S pattern. With an even shoulder line around 10,125 and the record peak of 10,300, this looks like a loaded pattern. Furthermore, this past Friday, we broke the ‘neckline’ which would be the qualifier for very rudimentary text books as the cue for the reversal. I’m not so confident.
As far as the ‘turn’ perspective in the index’s recent price action, I think there is certainly a lot of attention being paid to the Nasdaq – particularly because the tech sector of the US equity market has been the focal point of a lot of outperformance within the US equity space (which is itself is an outperformer relative to global peers). That said, the break from Friday hasn’t seen follow through on Monday and there remains a fairly weighty support below in the area of 9,800 – 9,750, which is the former February swing high, the 100-period (on 2-hour chart) moving average and trendline support stretching back three months. If that collective support gives – and particularly if accompanied by a broad risk aversion – my confidence on a bearish trend reversal will be significantly bolstered.
Another head-and-shoulders pattern on my radar is the setup from crude oil this past month. This is an asset that could certainly be billed as ‘risk sensitive’, and many such markets are looking at congestion after the past three months effort to recover seriously lost ground. That said, not many of these measures are staging a clean set of technical milestones in the consolidation phase. You’ll notice below that I’m using the August futures (WTI) contract specifically to reduce the distortion from April’s negative dive. With a more aggressive ‘neckline’ support the pressure will likely come to a head soon, either negating or encouraging the pattern’s development.
