The Nasdaq composite turned positive for the year to date on Thursday as major tech names fueled a rapid recovery.
The index sat nearly 24% lower at its trough, but a combination of investor risk-taking and strong tech earnings fueled gains through April.
Facebook , Apple , Amazon , Microsoft , and Alphabet make up 38% of the Nasdaq composite, and big tech's appeal through coronavirus shutdowns has led the index to best its peers.
The Nasdaq composite wiped out its year-to-date losses on Thursday, riding on the coattails of last week's strong tech earnings and a broad market stabilization.
The index was down nearly 24% by March 23 when coronavirus-fueled selling hit its peak, and it has since climbed as investors bet on tech giants to ride out the economic downturn. The Nasdaq composite outperformed the S&P 500 and the Dow Jones industrial average through April's market rally and extended its lead as earnings season began.
Much of the index's gains are tied to the "big five" tech stocks — Alphabet , Facebook , Microsoft , Amazon , and Apple — and their outperformance through the pandemic-induced downturn. The first three companies all beat expectations for first-quarter results on April 29 and soared on fresh investor optimism. The gains pushed the Nasdaq composite to a 3.6% single-day gain.
Read more: GOLDMAN SACHS: Traders are reaping unusually large profits from earnings-related stock trades. Here are 15 picks for the remainder of the season.
Quarterly reports from Amazon and Apple the following day soured the run-up. Amazon shocked investors by announcing that all of its next-quarter profit would be used for coronavirus aid. Apple beat expectations, but its withholding of fiscal third-quarter guidance saw its shares trade lower on Friday and drag the Nasdaq into a session loss.
The index erased its Friday losses through the first full week of May, ticking higher as investors cheered an oil-market recovery and gradual reopenings throughout the US.
Even as economic data releases and industry surveys project a deep recession, tech names "have been viewed as relative safety blankets in this scary Category 5 storm," the Wedbush analyst Dan Ives said in a note. The firms' exposure to cloud themes is key, he added, as widespread shelter-in-place and work-from-home orders have seen online activity surge.
Whereas the tech-heavy index has recovered from its virus trough, its peers remain well below their December 31 closing levels. The S&P 500 is 12% lower year-to-date, while the 30-stock Dow is down 17% for the same period.
Read more: Fund manager David Samra has handily beaten the market over nearly 2 decades. He shares 4 simple criteria he looks for in each investment — and details 4 'obvious' places investors should be rushing towards today.
The former index holds all five tech giants, but they make up 20% of its weighting. The same five companies make up 38% of the Nasdaq composite's holdings.
While the outsize weighting of major tech names fueled the Nasdaq's bounce-back, some analysts said they feared that such concentration could drive steep declines. Goldman Sachs has warned of such crowding , harking back to the tech crash of the early 2000s as a sign of what could come should the big five disappoint.
"Often, narrow rallies lead to large drawdowns as the handful of market leaders ultimately fail to generate enough fundamental earnings strength to justify elevated valuations and investor crowding," the strategist David Kostin wrote in a note in April.
Now read more markets coverage from Markets Insider and Business Insider:
