It’s hard to take Elon Musk seriously sometimes. The wacky CEO was recently in the news for revealing that he plans to sell off his earthly possessions in anticipation of limited cargo space on a rocket to Mars . And then there’s that wild baby name .
But however you feel about Musk and his spaced-out aspirations, it’s hard to not be inspired by what he’s done at Tesla TSLA,
and the value he’s delivered for shareholders. The stock is the top performer in the Nasdaq-100 NDX,
so far this year with a gain of more than 95%. And while the S&P 500 index SPX,
is up a paltry 6% in the last 24 months, these shares are up more than 170% in the same period.
There are certainly concerns about Tesla running up too much too soon. Even Musk tweeted that “ Tesla stock price is too high imo ,” after all. But there remain three significant catalysts that, should they materialize, could keep Tesla running to new highs in 2020.
Musk is pushing to resume production at Tesla’s Fremont, Calif., facility after the plant was closed on March 23 because of the coronavirus pandemic. Interestingly enough, the manufacturing center stayed open longer than some other manufacturers as Musk contended Tesla was an “essential business” and didn’t have to abide by shelter-in-place orders.
Production, not demand, has long been a focus for investors. Tesla produced 103,000 vehicles in the first quarter and delivered 88,400 vehicles — its best-ever first quarter performance. That figure includes the last week of March when its California operations were curtailed. Furthermore, Tesla noted that the tally “should be viewed as slightly conservative, as we only count a car as delivered if it is transferred to the customer and all paperwork is correct.”
It’s worth noting that Tesla’s disruption of the traditional auto dealer model has made it well-prepared for the current moment. The company is currently offering a touchless “Direct Drop” delivery model where people can submit payments and documents digitally and then receive their new car without any human interaction.
Is the domestic ramp-up of Tesla’s production a sure thing? Not by any stretch. Some analysts remain convinced the firm’s 2020 manufacturing volume will likely be in the low 400,000s and not quite up to the ambitious 500,000 target previously plotted by Musk & Co. However, that strong first-quarter performance and the looming end of a manufacturing shutdown should give investors hope.
Read: Elon Musk threatens to move Tesla out of California, then files lawsuit
Just as the pandemic affected domestic operations, there were initial concerns that coronavirus-related production shutdowns in China could dampen Tesla's substantial growth potential in the country's emerging EV marketplace. However, there seem to be signs that early 2020 hiccups didn’t cause serious challenges.
Case in point: A Chinese industry group reported Tesla sold 10,160 vehicles in China in March, its highest ever monthly total. There also are reports that current capacity is 3,000 vehicles a week, which would help put that all-important 500,000-vehicle overall production target within reach.
What’s more is that it’s increasingly clear Tesla is achieving this success in an auto marketplace that is objectively terrible thanks to public health concerns and related supply-chain disruptions. Overall passenger car sales in Chine plummeted nearly 41% in March compared with the prior year. But Tesla accounted for nearly one-third of all the EVs sold in that period.
This confluence of surging Tesla demand amid struggling competition makes for quite a catalyst — and could even help buy Tesla time if it misses its ambitious targets.
Put it side by side with cash-strapped Ford Motor F,
