The S&P 500 trading below its 200DMA had been brief, after the index found support from the 50DMA. That said, momentum signals continue to weaken, despite yesterday’s bounce back, which in turn could see gains limited and capped below 3110, which marks the 76.4% Fibonacci retracement. Market participants will continue to monitor the virus case count, particularly in the southern states of America, which have had to halt plans of reopening and thus see lockdown risks resurface. Elsewhere, eyes will also be on month/quarter-end rebalancing shifts, whereby Citi has signalled a strong rotation from European and Japanese equities into fixed income.
Since the pullback from its record high, the Nasdaq 100 has remained under pressure, particularly as the bearish RSI divergence holds. Given the aforementioned concerns of lockdown risks resurfacing on a state-wide basis, risks appear to be skewed to further weakness. As such, bears look for a retest of the pre-COVID record high sitting at 9750, which also marks yesterday’s low. That said, the broad uptrend remains intact for the Nasdaq 100 as central banks keep financial conditions loose. With this in mind, investors will be placing a close eye on Fed officials, most notably Powell and Brainard, in which the latter may elaborate further on Yield Curve Control (YCC).
--- Written by Justin McQueen, Market Analyst
DailyFX provides forex news and technical analysis on the trends that influence the global currency markets.
Leveraged trading in foreign currency or off-exchange products on margin carries significant risk and may not be suitable for all investors. We advise you to carefully consider whether trading is appropriate for you based on your personal circumstances. Forex trading involves risk. Losses can exceed deposits. We recommend that you seek independent advice and ensure you fully understand the risks involved before trading.
FX Publications Inc (dba DailyFX) is registered with the Commodities Futures Trading Commission as a Guaranteed Introducing Broker and is a member of the National Futures Association (ID# 0517400). Registered Address: 32 Old Slip, Suite 803; New York, NY 10005. FX Publications Inc is a subsidiary of IG US Holdings, Inc (a company registered in Delaware under number 4456365)
News & Analysis at your fingertips.
