A PutWrite strategy generates returns which are similar to ownership of the underlying asset or index with the advantage of a buffer against losses to the downside.  Unfortunately, it’s possible for the underlying asset or index to drop enough that it falls below the bottom of that buffer.  If the underlying asset falls in price a PutWrite taken to option expiration will always outperform simple ownership of the underlying but that may not seem to be much help if the underlying drops substantially below that buffer.
Several investors have asked if there is a way to use a PutWrite while limiting the downside.  There is such a strategy; instead of selling a put option you would sell a put spread.
Selling a put spread as a replacement for a PutWrite is similar to a PutWrite in that we begin by selling a put option which is just below at-the-money meaning the strike price of the put option is just below the current level of the underlying.  In our case that underlying is the Nasdaq-100 index, ticker symbol NDX.
But selling a put spread has a second component which limits the risk.  When selling that put option which is just below at-the-money we could also buy a put option which is out-of-the-money.  That put option we are long will limit the risk inherent in selling the put option which is just below at-the-money.  This is usually done simultaneously and as a single trade and is called a put spread; it is sometimes called a put vertical spread.  The risk in selling a put spread is dramatically lower than in selling a put option as in a PutWrite but there’s also a downside, the amount of option premium collected is lower as well.
For example, at midday on Monday, December 9, with the Nasdaq-100 at 8373, an investor could have sold a put option with a strike price of 8370 expiring on December 31 for 115.00.  That 115.00 would be the option sellers to keep.  The breakeven at option expiration would be 8255.00.  But if the Nasdaq-100 dropped far enough the trade would lose money.  For example if the Nasdaq-100 dropped to 8000 the loss would be 255.00.  The downside risk for a PutWrite is similar to the risk from owning the Nasdaq-100 itself as you can see.
If that same investor instead sold a put spread they might sell the same 8370 strike put option for 115.00 but reduce the risk of the whole trade by simultaneously buying the 8250 strike put option with the same expiration.  That 8250 strike put option could have been bought for 79.00.  The put spread would have been sold for a net of 36.00 (115.00 – 79.00).  That 36.00 would be the investors to keep and would represent the maximum potential profit.
The potential return for selling a put spread is significantly lower, just 36.00 versus 115.00, but the risk is lower as well.  The maximum risk for selling the put spread and taking it to expiration would be just 84.00 (the width of the put spread, 120.00, minus the 36.00 in premium received).  You can see the payoff below.
Put spreads on the Nasdaq-100 are a powerful tool for investors, hedgers and speculators.  They can be used as a stand-alone trade to express nearly any market outlook and they can be combined with other strategies to fine-tune an outcome to align with thesis.
In later posts we’ll examine other basic NDX option structures that give Nasdaq-100 investors tools to express their point of view.
Nasdaq publishes articles about important aspects of the NDX option market each Monday and Thursday.  Check back here for our latest post.
You can follow Scott on Twitter: @ScottNations
Performance of an index is not illustrative of any particular investment.  Index returns quoted represent past performance which is no guarantee of future results.
The views and opinions expressed herein are the views and opinions of the author and do not necessarily reflect those of Nasdaq, Inc.
