, the virtualization software company. This is one of the better companies to take advantage of the work from home trend going forward. Our AI technology has assigned factor scores of F in Technical, A in Growth, A in Momentum Volatility and A in Quality Value to the company. It has certainly been a volatile year for the stock, as seen in the chart below, but the recent pullback should be used as an opportunity to get long. The stock has gained 25.85% for the year and will look to add to that total throughout 2020.
is a US-based wireless telecommunications service provider, servicing postpaid and prepaid customers from a variety of demographic segments. It also sells smartphones, tablets, and other devices backed by the high-speed networks the company owns. Our deep learning algorithms have identified the stock as a top buy this morning, with factor scores of B in Technical, A in Growth, A in Momentum Volatility and C in Quality Value. While the stock is down 9.41% for the year, it has shown life recently, gaining 15% since May 13.
In the specialty chemicals industry, our AI system has identified a top buy in Stepan Co, the Illinois based company. They operate in three segments, but the surfactants segment generates most of its revenue which sells cleaning agents used in detergents, shampoos, body wash, fabric softeners, toothpastes, and other personal care products. This has seen increased demand as more consumers look to be as clean as possible, an effective way to prevent the coronavirus. The stock has been given factor scores of B in Technical, C in Growth, A in Momentum Volatility and B in Quality Value, and is down only 2.22% for the year.
joins the list of purchases for today. The deep learning algorithms have given factor scores of A in Technical, C in Growth, A in Momentum Volatility and A in Quality Value to the leader in the energy drink subsegment of the beverage industry. Coca-Cola
is actually the company’s largest shareholder and owns roughly 19%, a great partner to have in the sector, and the stock has rallied impressively off the lows, gaining 14.1% for the year overall.
