What is a Fund of Funds or FoF?
Summary A Fund of Funds or FoF invests in mutual fund schemes. A regular mutual fund scheme or fund collects money from investors and invest the money in stocks or debt based on its mandate.
A Fund of Funds or FoF invests in mutual fund schemes. A regular mutual fund scheme or fund collects money from investors and invest the money in stocks or debt based on its mandate. A FoF, on the other, collects money from investors and invest it in other mutual fund schemes. These mutual fund schemes can be within the fund house or in other fund houses.
Here are some examples of FoFs in India: Franklin Dynamic Allocation FoF, Motilal Oswal Nasdaq 100 FoF, ABSL Financial Planning FoF, Kotak Asset Allocator, Quatum Equity FoF, among others.
Some of you must be wondering why would a mutual fund scheme invest in other schemes? The answer is simple: when the there are good mutual fund schemes that have already proven their worth with consistent performance, what is the point of investing directly in equity and stock. Why not invest these schemes with a proven track record? That is the basic logic behind these schemes.
However, these schemes or the concept of FoF never really took off for two reasons. One, initially these schemes were only investing in schemes within the fund house. That means these schemes were just another way to amass more assets under management. This has changed lately. Some FoFs have started investing in schemes of other funds houses. For example, Quantum Equity FoF invests in Invesco India Growth Opportunities Fund, Kotak Standard Multicap Fund, Mirae Asset Large Cap Fund, ICICI Bluechip Fund, L&T Midcap Fund, Axis Bluechip Fund, and Franklin india Prima Fund.
Two, FoFs were treated as non-equity schemes for taxation. This was major drawback at that time when equity mutual funds used to enjoy zero long-term capital gains tax.
Most investors asked the fund manager a simple question: why would I pay tax simply because I am using FoF route. Though Amfi has been making representations to the ministry year after year, these schemes continued to be taxed like debt schemes. This is mainly because equity schemes qualify for LTCG taxation only if they invest at least 65% of their corpus in Indian equities; this is the reason why even international funds that invest overseas equities also do not qualify for equity taxation.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
