James Mickleboro | June 30, 2020 7:11pm | More on: NDQ NXT RMD
If you’re looking to invest $10,000 into the share market in FY 2021, I think the three ASX shares listed below could be quality options.
I believe all three have the potential to beat the market over the next 12 months and beyond. Here’s why I like them:
BetaShares NASDAQ 100 ETF (ASX: NDQ)
The first option for investors to consider investing $10,000 into is the BetaShares NASDAQ 100 ETF. This exchange traded fund allows you to invest in the 100 largest non-financial businesses listed on the famous technology-focused NASDAQ index through a single investment. This means you’ll be investing in shares such as Amazon, Apple, Netflix, Facebook, Microsoft, and Google’s parent, Alphabet. I think these are among the highest quality businesses in the world and capable of driving the NASDAQ index higher in FY 2021 and throughout the 2020s.
Another option to consider for that $10,000 investment is NEXTDC. I believe the data centre operator is positioned perfectly to capitalise on the cloud computing boom. According to global technology research firm Gartner, it has forecast that 80% of all organisations will shift their workloads to third-party data centres by 2025 . And given that this prediction was made pre-pandemic, I wouldn’t be surprised if this shift has accelerated. Overall, I expect this to lead to increasing demand for its innovative data centre outsourcing solutions. This should support solid earnings growth as the company scales.
Another ASX share to consider buying with the $10,000 is ResMed. I’m confident the medical device company can be a strong performer in FY 2021 and beyond. This is due to its focus on the sleep treatment market and the proliferation of obstructive sleep apnoea, which is driving increasing demand for its masks and software solutions. In addition to this, a second wave of coronavirus in a number of key markets looks likely to lead to strong ventilator sales in the near term.
When investing expert Scott Phillips has a stock tip, it can pay to listen. After all, the flagship Motley Fool Share Advisor newsletter he has run for more than eight years has provided thousands of paying members with stock picks that have doubled, tripled or even more.*
Scott just revealed what he believes are the five best ASX stocks for investors to buy right now. These stocks are trading at dirt-cheap prices and Scott thinks they are great buys right now.
Motley Fool contributor James Mickleboro owns shares of NEXTDC Limited. The Motley Fool Australia owns shares of and has recommended BETANASDAQ ETF UNITS. The Motley Fool Australia has recommended ResMed Inc. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy . This article contains general investment advice only (under AFSL 400691). Authorised by Scott Phillips.
