Updated July 5, 2020 / Original July 2, 2020
In the art world, you can’t go wrong buying Picasso or Matisse. Sure, their works fetch astronomical prices when they come up for sale, but at least no one will question your judgement , or your taste.
In the investment world, the same might be said for buying Amazon.com (ticker: AMZN), Alphabet (GOOG), or any other fast-rising growth stock that has been beyond investors’ reproach. But an investor who sticks with the market’s hottest, and most richly priced, stocks could be missing an opportunity to reap potentially large gains in overlooked, unloved issues .
Buying “ugly” stocks—like Sally Beauty Holdings (SBH), Michaels (MIK), the arts-and-crafts retailer, and software company Blackbaud (BLKB)—might not seem to make much sense, especially with another wave of the coronavirus threatening to undo recent economic progress. But these shares could surge if almost anything goes right.
Roughly 15,000 stocks trade in the U.S. About 9,000 are covered by Wall Street securities analysts. Only 100 have no Buy ratings. Shares of that group dropped roughly 50% in the first half of 2020, on average, compared with a drop of 4% in the S&P 500 and 10% in the Dow Jones Industrial Average .
The Street’s most-loved stocks, on the other hand, defined as those rated Buy by 90% of the analysts following them, were flat over the first half. Buying quality is a time-tested strategy. Buying junk, not so much.
Still, quality is expensive. The most-loved stocks fetch about 27 times next year’s estimated earnings, versus the S&P 500 ’s
      19 times. Many of the most-hated trade at single-digit P/E ratios.
Here’s a closer look at Sally, Michaels, and Blackbaud, any of which just might return a patient investor’s love.
Remember when haircuts were a thing ? Shareholders of Sally Beauty, which sells professional beauty supplies, sure do. The company operates about 5,000 stores in North and South America and Europe, and is also the largest beauty-products distributor in the U.S. Sales to salon professionals account for about 50% of revenue, which totaled $3.9 billion last year. Selling to pros helps insulate Sally from the Amazon effect.
Eight analysts cover Sally Beauty; two rate it Sell compared with one Buy. It’s easy to understand why. The shares have lost investors about 16% a year on average over the past five years, falling to a recent $13.17, compared with an average annualized gain of about 4% for the Russell 2000 Index.
Loveless stocks can lift off if almost anything goes right.
The 2021 P/E ratio of Wall Street’s most-loved stocks, rated Buy by 90% of analysts covering them
Sally has faced rising competition from big-box retailers offering higher-end beauty and hair-color products, Sally’s core market. Its 2019 sales were similar to 2014’s, and profit margins were roughly 2 percentage points lower.
To counter rivals, the company undertook a makeover a couple of years ago, installing updated sales technology and building out its digital capabilities. Things were improving; then Covid-19 arrived, and stores and salons were shut. But things are looking up. More than 80% of Sally Beauty’s U.S. stores were back open, as of June 2.
Wall Street expects Sally Beauty to earn about $1.10 a share in fiscal 2020, which ends in September, down from $2.26 in 2019. But earnings could bounce back to $1.95 in 2021. The stock trades for just 6.5 times estimated 2021 profits, close to its lowest valuation in the past few years.
Sally Beauty isn’t blemish-free. It has about $2.1 billion in net debt outstanding, a risk for any idled retailer. However, in normal times, “the company has always generated a decent amount of free cash flow,” says Venk Reddy, founder of Zeo Capital Advisors, which holds Sally bonds.
Michaels is another retailer fallen on hard times, due to Covid-19. Pre-pandemic sales, generated from more than 1,200 locations in 49 states and Canada, topped $5 billion in its fiscal 2020 year, ended on Feb. 1.
Yet sales fell 27%, to $800 million, in Michaels’ fiscal first quarter, as 900 of its stores were forced to close. The shares—down 13% in the first half, to $7.07—have been hit hard.
Receive a regular newsletter highlighting our top stories, along with updates and special offers from Barron's.
Still, some might call that an improvement. Michaels’ shares have cost investors almost 24% annually, on average, for the past five years, as sales have stagnated. Revenue grew just 7% from 2015 through the end of fiscal 2020—and profit margins are about 3 percentage points lower than they were five years ago. No wonder that three analysts rate the shares the equivalent of Sell, versus two Buys.
Still, there’s good news. Demand bounced back when stores reopened in May. Wall Street expects the company to earn about 94 cents a share in 2021, down from $2.11 in 2020. Earnings are expected to rise to $1.45 in 2022. The stock trades for less than five times next year’s estimated earnings, close to its lowest multiple in the past few years.
Other things are happening at the company. Michaels has a new CEO, Ashley Buchanan, brought in from Walmart (WMT) in 2020. Buchanan has worked in merchandising, and is in the midst of implementing a strategy focused on Michaels’ core crafting customers, with new loyalty programs and store formats. That’s a smart strategy because crafting can also benefit from in-store instruction and expertise.
Charleston, S.C.-based Blackbaud sells software that can manage all aspects of non-profit businesses.
Shares have dropped almost 11% a year, on average, over the past three years. Part of the problem is fresh competition from industry giant Salesforce.com (CRM), explains Baird analyst Rob Oliver . The software giant has started to make inroads into the nonprofit industry, making Blackbaud investors nervous .
Wall Street is nervous too. Ten analysts cover the stock. One rates it Sell, none rate it Buy. Covid-19 doesn’t help, either. Many nonprofits are shut, and layoffs in the sector reduce the number of people needing software licenses. Museums, another set of Blackbaud customers, also are closed. No tickets to sell means no payments to process with Blackbaud products.
But Blackbaud’s stock reflects a lot of bad news, trading for about 3 times estimated 2021 sales of $909 million.
Other software companies similar to Blackbaud trade at far higher multiples. Tyler Technologies (TYL), a similarly sized peer that focused on municipal governments , fetches nearly 11 times estimated 2021 sales. Its stock is up 18% in 2020. Investors seemingly are unconcerned about the impact that Covid-19 might have on government budgets in the near future.
Given the valuation disparity, Blackbaud’s lagging performance could draw an activist. That isn’t a prediction, just an example of one thing that could go right. And when things go right for ugly stocks, it’s beautiful for investors.
In the art world, you can’t go wrong buying Picasso or Matisse.
