tumbled 9.09%, or a loss of $-1.3 per share, to close at $13.00. After opening the day at $13.68, shares of Bloomin' Brands Inc. traded as high as $13.95 and as 
low as $12.64. Volume was 3.47 million shares over 24,644 trades, against an average daily volume of n/a shares and a total float of 87.49 million.
As a result of the decline, Bloomin' Brands Inc. now has a market cap of $1.14 billion.  In the last 
year, shares of Bloomin' Brands Inc. have traded between a range of $24.30 and $4.54, and its 50-day SMA is currently $n/a and 200-day SMA is $n/a.
For a complete fundamental analysis of Bloomin' Brands Inc., check out Equities.com’s Stock Valuation Analysis report for 
Still paying commissions on stock trades? Equities.com now offers $7.99/month unlimited trading and flat-fee options trading for $89.99/month! Get started today by https://www.equities.com/trading-start
Bloomin Brands Inc operates as a casual dining restaurant company. Its brand includes Outback Steakhouse, Carrabba's Italian Grill, Bonefish Grill, and Fleming's Prime Steakhouse and Wine Bar. The company owns and operates its restaurants, and the remainder is franchised. It derives revenue mainly from the United States, but the company has a presence in Brazil and South Korea with company-owned Outbacks and Carrabbas. In addition, it also has exposure to several countries, predominantly in Asia, principally through franchising.
Bloomin' Brands Inc. is based out of Tampa, FL and has some 94,000 employees. Its CEO is David J. Deno.
Bloomin' Brands Inc. is a component of the Russell 2000. The Russell 2000 is one of the leading indices tracking small-cap companies in the United States. It's maintained by  Russell Investments, an 
industry leader in creating and maintaining indices, and consists of the smallest 2000 stocks from the broader Russell 3000 index.
Russell's indices differ from traditional indices like the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or S&P 500, whose members are selected by committee, because they base membership entirely on an 
objective, rules based methodology. The 3,000 largest companies by market cap make up the Russell 3000, with the 2,000 smaller companies making up the Russell 2000. It's a simple approach that gives 
a broad, unbiased look at the small-cap market as a whole.
To get more information on Bloomin' Brands Inc. and to follow the company’s latest updates, you can visit the company’s profile page here: BLMN’s Profile . For more news on the financial markets and emerging growth companies, be sure to visit Equities.com’s 
email newsletter to ensure you don’t miss out on any of our best stories.
All data provided by QuoteMedia and was accurate as of 4:30PM ET.
DISCLOSURE: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not represent the views of equities.com . Readers should not consider statements made by the author as formal recommendations and should consult their financial advisor before making any investment decisions. To read our full disclosure, please go to: http://www.equities.com/disclaimer
