Many energy companies could default, according to Bank of America.
Corporate bonds may be rallying on news of government intervention, but Bank of America still anticipates a contraction in the U.S. economy and corporate profits this year.
In other words, the credit cycle has turned and a recession is likely on its way, the bank says, with as little as 1.5 to 2 months to go before such a downturn is irreversible. And its strategists have identified two specific “points of pain” in the market:  Small-cap companies and preferred shares.
Earnings of small companies in the Russell 2000 Index normally fall by 30% during a recession, Bank of America says, more than the typical 20% decline for the larger multinational firms in the S&P 500.
That probably means more trouble is ahead for smaller companies. Small-cap companies are more likely to be rated as junk—about 70% of small companies’ debt is high yield, the bank says.
Those lower ratings come with higher costs, but small companies have piled debt onto their balance sheets anyway. Companies in the Russell 2000 have a record amount of outstanding debt compared to their earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda. And that is before the worst effects of the coronavirus start to show up in corporate earnings reports. It seems safe to assume that the virus will push down Ebitda, which will further increase small companies’ debt burdens relative to earnings.
Bank of America’s high-yield strategists say that they see a recession as their base case, and they expect defaults in the junk bond market to average 9% per year. But that figure assumes that U.S. economic activity recovers quickly from the coronavirus pandemic and associated containment measures, so the figure could easily be revised higher.
Within the high-yield market, about 25% to 30% of energy companies could default, the strategists write. If that sector is excluded, their optimistic default rate would only be 6%.
Still, the way junk-rated companies (and investors) have been acting makes it seem like they are trying to prepare for a much worse outcome.
“…access to capital for the HY and leveraged loan issuers remains completely shut for the time being,” the bank writes. “In the meantime, HY issuers are tapping their bank revolver lines en masse, cutting their capex budgets, furloughing their workers, and announcing other measures to preserve cash. Given that the duration of the complete shutdown of major economies remains unclear, leveraged credit issuers are, without an exaggeration, fighting for their survival.”
That raises another question:  What outcome is reflected in the high-yield market’s price? As of the close of trading Tuesday, the junk-bond market was yielding 10.5 percentage points more than benchmark Treasuries. That qualifies as distressed under S&P Ratings’ definition. And that means it could provide a decent long-term return for investors willing to take the risk that the yield spread could widen out another percentage point or so.
“In other words even in more pessimistic scenarios, the downside is generally limited from here,” the strategists wrote.
The only problem is that the high-yield bond market had already started to rally off of those lows (or highs in spreads) by midday Thursday.
The two exchange-traded funds tracking the market, the iShares iBoxx $ High Yield Corporate Bond ETF (HYG) and the SPDR Bloomberg Barclays High Yield Bond ETF (JNK) rallied 3% and 2.7%, respectively.
That means high yield bonds aren’t still as cheap. And only time can tell whether U.S. authorities’ future actions will lend more support to risky markets or cause losses.
Corporate bonds may be rallying on news of government intervention, but Bank of America still anticipates a contraction in the U.
