Why? My speculation is that global stock markets and investors command more computer power, better software, faster bandwidth, and the intense focus of tens of millions of individuals betting their own money. Most investors are highly accomplished, numerate and analytical in their own fields. Think of the world’s investors and their digital tools as a global, vast, massively parallel supercomputer. This supercomputer likes nothing more than to bulldoze those acting on bad data or their own confirmation biases. My friend, the $100 billion fund founder, likes to say, “Mr. Market is the Great Humiliator of us all.” The market rewards good decisions and punishes bad ones harshly. Is that true of even the most well-intended health services, research foundations, and governments?
Why start with the global stock markets as a baseline predictor of the 1-to-6-month future? Why not U.S. stock market? A few reasons. One is size – the market capitalization of global stocks is around $60 trillion as of March 27 (Allow me to use round numbers, since they will change daily anyway); the U.S. stock market is around $23 trillion. The second reason pertains to the COVID-19 crisis; it is a global crisis, first spotted in China, then larger Asia, then Iran and Europe. Now it is surging in America. The global stock markets respond daily to both awful and promising news about COVID-19, and that includes both good and bad policy responses. China’s stock markets Shanghai (-10%), Shenzhen (-6%) and Hong Kong (-19%) are down by comparatively modest percentages this year, reflecting China’s first-to-suffer, first-to-recover status.
But let’s now move to the U.S. stock markets. The S&P 500, Russell 2000 and Nasdaq 100 are down in 2020 (as of March 27) -21%, -32% and -18% respectively. What does that tell us? The sagging Russell 2000 says small companies will suffer the most. On the other hand, Nasdaq 100 says big tech companies are in the best shape. More on tech’s future in Tip #3.
Every Expert Talks His Book – Expect It, Discount It
Anthony Fauci was on CNN on March 29, predicting 100,000 to 200,000 U.S. deaths from COVID-19. Bet the “under” on his low number, 100,000. If that sounds crass, let me stipulate that Dr. Fauci is extremely smart and accomplished. He sees the data, does the math. He is a man of science and integrity. But Dr. Fauci, like all of us, speaks his book. By that, I mean Dr. Fauci is professionally obligated to give us (and President Trump) the worst case scenario. His career and reputation will be wrecked if he underestimates the death toll. But it won’t be wrecked if he overestimates it. If it turns out the American COVID-19 death toll in 2020 is, say, 25,000 to 50,000, Dr. Fauci will be hailed as the man who warned us in time.
Watch a bullish stock investor on CNBC and you can bet your heirlooms he speaks his book. Watch a bearish investor, same thing. ( See Ackman, Bill ). Watch Trump fans and critics duke it out on cable news or, twice a day, on Real Clear Politics. These commentators are dug into their positions, talking their book. They speak words they know will fire up their political patrons or fan base.
Everyone who breathes speaks their book (including the author of this piece). Expect it and discount accordingly. It’s a good idea, therefore, to read the counter arguments of your favorite experts, and then judge for yourself who is painting the more accurate picture. Search and destroy your own confirmation biases as best you can.
In mid-January I interviewed Pat Gelsinger, the CEO of VMware about what he calls the biggest opportunity in global business over the next ten years:  The acceleration of cloud-computing and AI-fueled software to transform or disrupt all industries. Gelsinger’s insights about technology’s expanding role in all businesses hint why the Nasdaq 100 has fallen less than the S&P 500 and Russell 2000 since COVID-19 began scaring markets. Precisely because COVID-19 has pushed all other stories off the front page, it’s easy to forget the digital transformation megatrend. It’s a mistake to do so.
Below is an excerpt from my mid-January interview with VMware CEO, Pat Gelsinger. He explains the coming wave of digital transformation as well as anyone. Meanwhile, stay safe.
Karlgaard: Early in your career, you were the principal architect of one of Intel's major microprocessor lines. It was Intel’s great cofounder, Gordon Moore, who gave us his Moore's Law idea – which has predicted accurately the rate of digital evolution …
Gelsinger: For five decades, right? Moore predicted a doubling every two years over five decades. That means you go from nothing to pretty dramatic. In fact, I just had a Graphcore team in here. How many transistors you think are on their latest chip?
Karlgaard: Intel 4004 was so-named because that was the number of transistors, right?
Gelsinger: Yeah, approximately. You know and my namesake, the 486, was 1,286,432. These are just crazy numbers when you think at that level, but it essentially created a substrate which now can become very small and cheap. Thus 60% of humanity has Internet access.
Karlgaard: Which is 4 billion people.
Gelsinger: Yeah, we're just approaching 4 billion people. Even as Moore's law moderates, at this point – we'll talk about architectural effects in a moment – but even as it moderates, it’s now at cloud scale. So 60% of the people in the world has access to Moore's law, through the cloud. This is a fundamental shift. This weekend, you and I can go rent a supercomputer if we said, "my business plan requires a supercomputer." We can spend a half a billion of dollars of capital and destroy our business plan, or we can rent it this weekend on my Amex card," I mean, there is extraordinary agility in that.
Karlgaard: Microsoft Azure and Amazon Web Services are guaranteed to knock the crap out of each other, driving down prices.
Gelsinger: Yeah, which to me says, the cloud wars haven't even started yet. When you're growing at 40%, 50%, 70%, you're not competing, you're just keeping up with demand. When that starts to moderate, which I think happens around 50/50 – that is, when you get to 50% private and 50% public cloud – that's when cloud really becomes competitive.
Karlgaard: The public cloud is, what, about 20% now of computing’s share?
Gelsinger: About 30% to 35%. So we have two to three years, I will guess, when it gets to 50/50. Then we’ll see the real battle start, which is going to have an extraordinary benefit to unit economics.
Karlgaard: Which will make it even more affordable to people who can’t afford it now.
Gelsinger: Right. So now, connectivity, we go by the estimates, will be 90% of humanity by 2030. So now you start to say, "What can you do with it?" and to me, that's where AI and IoT come to play because you can take what I’ve described as "crappy algorithms" that have been getting only incrementally better for 30 years, but now when you have unlimited computer power and essentially unlimited data, you can harvest data at scale.
One of the Stanford AI researchers recently said, "What used to take 100 million lines of code, now done against AI algorithms can be reduced to a couple thousand lines of code," which is essentially image recognition software. That’s an extraordinary reduction of the time and money to gain insights, right? And you see insights in two dimensions as you think of AI - one is in terms of recognition, and the other is in terms of prediction. Those are the two where now I can say, "I've seen your behavior, I can predict your future behavior," or "I've looked at an extraordinary amount of images – they might be cat pictures, they might be radiology pictures – but I can now do recognition at scale as never before." I can now do that at scale with AI, and IoT will  bridging the physical and digital worlds.
Karlgaard: With more and better bandwidth every five years or so too.
Gelsinger: That's right. That's where 5G comes in as the next major enabler. So now, we've sort of painted the picture of the digital world’s four superpowers – mobility, cloud, AI, IoT.
I have cloud, I can create the scale. I have mobility, I can reach all these people in the world. I have AI, I have can do things with unlimited compute and unlimited data. And IoT gives me essentially an unlimited capacity to harvest data. So essentially, now the table's set.
Karlgaard: As you look into the next 5 to 10 years, how do you see the enterprise technology ecosystem forming? Where are the opportunities? Where does VMware play?
Gelsinger: I would align with your idea that we’ve entered the golden age of enterprise software. The reason I say that is because enterprise has broken out of enterprise in the sense that now, tech decisions are not IT decisions anymore. They're business decisions. I was recently with the CIO of one of the big three auto manufacturers. He looks at me and says, "Help me compete with Tesla!" That's a different question than, "Does IT turn on the new mail system?” That’s a fundamental business decision.
Karlgaard: Hah! I’m guessing the CIO had just presented to the board of directors in the quarterly meeting and they asked why Tesla's market value is $120 billion, four times ours.
Gelsinger: You know, all of a sudden, digital transformation is thebusiness imperative for every sector of every industry. Doing it, and doing it right, becomes essential to every business strategy on the planet. So last year, GDP growth globally, was 3-ish percent, IT growth globally, 4-ish percent, enterprise software, 8-plus percent. So, we're seeing this separation from IT spend. My belief is we have a decade in front of us, not just a couple of years. Meanwhile, hardware is consolidating because it's less relevant. When I have cloud capacity, do I care what hardware system's beneath it? Not really. At that level, sure I need more GPU capacity to run my AI algorithms, but I'm running AWS’s Sagemaker, I'm not picking a GPU. So in this 10-year growth cycle, there will be winners and losers, but it's clearly a software-centric, cloud-centric cycle and I believe that largely is dominant.
Karlgaard: Is the world going entirely to the public cloud?
Gelsinger: Absolutely not. I think the evolution of cloud is governed by what I call the three laws of hybrid cloud – the laws of physics, the laws of economics, and the laws of land.
Laws of physics: If I need a 50-millisecond round trip, I can't go 200 milliseconds to the public cloud. Laws of physics says more computing will get pushed to the edge.
Gelsinger: Yeah, you know, God just still hasn’t changed it, right?
Karlgaard: Of course, mankind only discovered the speed of light in the 1800s, so who knows what else is out there.
Gelsinger: Have you studied quantum entanglement at all? The original thesis was made by Einstein. It was proven about a decade later that it actually could occur - this idea of two quantum particles being able to be entangled at a distance and that distance has now been proven to be hundreds of miles. So essentially, you can have two quantum particles that are acting in exact harmony hundreds of miles separated.
Karlgaard: Which blows away the speed of light as the ultimate barrier.
Gelsinger: Exactly. But the practical problem remains. When they're quantum entangled, if you actually un-entangle them, you can't do anything with them. So it hasn't been able to be proven to be useful in any capacity yet. But maybe our children will figure that out – how to do the utility.
But back to what I was saying about the three laws that will govern the cloud’s evolution … In addition to the laws of physics, you have the laws of economics. We still see fundamental economic advantages to be able to run your own data centers versus in the cloud. Now, some of these big cloud wars may change some of these economic questions and tilt toward the public cloud.
But then the laws of the land come into play. In the laws of the land, when I was in Germany, this was about two months ago, we were announcing our expanded partnership with T-Systems and Deutsche Telekom. That’s on Tuesday. On Wednesday, the German Minister of Technology and Economics announces that all German citizen data will reside on German-controlled and German resident clouds. Laws of the land.
So laws of economics, physics, and land will drive the balance of private vs. public cloud.
Edge computing – because of physics, we’ll see more of the computing capacity will get pushed to the edge over time as well. In the next phase, the computing environment becomes more data-centric, more latency-sensitive and the results will be, "Hmm, this will be the next battlefront." In this view we see a great opportunity in front of us, this great explosion of data, the explosion of new use cases, increasing digitization of everything.
If I can get VMware to sit inside of that, we’ll continue to find the extraordinary expansion of the business.
I'm the publisher of Forbes magazine, where I write a biweekly column called Innovation Rules. I'm also a regular panelist on cable news' popular business show, Forbes on
I'm the publisher of Forbes magazine, where I write a biweekly column called Innovation Rules. I'm also a regular panelist on cable news' popular business show, Forbes on FOX (with an average viewership of 1.2 million households per show in 2012), and frequent guest analyst on CNBC's The Kudlow Report. My 2004 book, Life 2.0, was a Wall Street Journal business bestseller. I'm also an entrepreneur, an active angel investor, and sit on three outside boards. For co-founding Silicon Valley's largest public affairs organization, the 6,500-member Churchill Club, I'm a past Northern California winner of Ernst & Young's prestigious "Entrepreneur of the Year Award." I earned a B.A. from Stanford University. I lecture up to 50 to 60 times a year on the innovation economy.
