“Most investors, both institutional and individual, will find that the best way to own common stocks is through an index fund that charges minimal fees. Those following this path are sure to beat the net results (after fees and expenses) delivered by the great majority of investment professionals.” — Warren Buffett
I have stated numerous times in this column over the past 18 years that I am a big proponent of index funds. At Capital Wealth Management, about 75% of our clients are invested in index funds. Numerous studies and academic research over the years have demonstrated the superior performance of index funds versus actively managed funds. One of the reasons is due to the difference in each fund’s investment objective.
An actively managed fund is typically run by a fund manager and/or a team of fund managers who are actively buying and selling stocks in an effort to outperform their particular funds index like the Standard & Poor’s 500 index for large-cap stocks or the Russell 2000 index for small cap stocks.
Rather than buying and selling stocks that a fund manager thinks will outperform its asset class, an index fund simply buys all the shares that make up a particular stock funds index, like the Standard & Poor’s 500 index for large-cap stocks or the Russell 2000 index for small cap stocks. Unlike actively managed funds, an index fund’s objective is simply to match, rather than outperform, the performance of its asset category. Because index funds buy and hold rather than trade frequently like an actively managed fund, they are much cheaper to operate.
One of the most popular studies comparing the performance of index funds to actively managed funds is Standard & Poor’s “S&P Indices Versus Active” report. Every year since 2002, the SPIVA report compares the annual performance of actively managed mutual funds to their index funds. The results for 2019 are out, and it wasn’t all bad news for actively managed funds. Large-cap stock funds once again underperformed their index, however actively managed, while small-cap, mid-cap and Real Estate (REITS) stock funds outperformed their index.
Overall, however, index funds outperformed 70% of all U.S. actively managed stock mutual funds in 2019. (A chart showing the percent of various asset classes of actively managed stock funds that have underperformed their index over the last five, 10 and 15 years can be found at capitalwealthmngt.com.)
One of the biggest reasons index funds typically outperform actively managed mutual funds is that Index funds have much lower expenses. The average actively managed mutual fund has an annual expense ratio of about 1.2%. Index funds have an average annual expense ratio of 0.5%. Vanguard has index funds with an average expense ratio of just 0.1 percent.
This means, that on average, an index fund can begin each year with a 1.1% head-start on actively managed funds. In the short term, the difference in fees may not have a significant impact on a portfolio’s performance, but as as the investment period increases, the additional compounding of the additional growth resulting form the 1.1% difference in fees makes it increasing difficult for actively managed funds to outperform their corresponding index fund.
For example, two portfolios each start with $100,000. The first portfolio invested in actively managed mutual funds has an average expense ratio of 1.2%. The second portfolio invested in index funds mutual funds has an average expense ration of 0.1%. Each portfolio earns an average annual return (before expenses) of 10%. As a result, after expenses, Portfolio A earns an average annual return of 8.8%, and Portfolio B earns an annual return of 9.9%. After five years, Portfolio A is worth $152,455 and Portfolio B is worth $160,320 (an additional $7,865 in savings). After 15 years, Portfolio A is worth 354,350 and Portfolio B is worth $412,065 (an additional $57,715 in savings)
Many investors are under the impression that looking at a fund’s past record or its Morningstar star rating can determine which funds are likely to outperform their index. However, star ratings and past performance are not as good a predictor of future performance as a fund’s expenses. Even Morningstar acknowledges that fund expenses are better at predicting future performance than its own “star” rating system.
In an article by Russel Kinnel, Morningstar’s director of mutual-fund research, titled “How Expense Ratios and Star Ratings Predict Success,“ Kinnel states: “If there’s anything in the whole world of mutual funds that you can take to the bank, it’s that expense ratios help you make a better decision. In every single time period and data point tested, low-cost funds beat high-cost funds. Investors should make expense ratios a primary test in fund selection. They are still the most dependable predictor of performance.”
Martin Krikorian, is president of Capital Wealth Management, a registered investment adviser providing “fee-only” investment management services located at 9 Billerica Road, Chelmsford. He is the author of the investment books, “10 Chapters to Having a Successful Investment Portfolio” and the “7 Steps to Becoming a Successful Investor.” Martin can be reached at (978) 244-9254, Capital Wealth Managements website; www.capitalwealthmngt.com, or via email at, info@capitalwealthmngt.com.
