In this blog, we are going to take a look at the Elliottwave chart of RTY_F.  Daily chart below shows that RTY_F ended the decline from January 17, 2020 high at 948.50 low.  Since reaching that March 19 low, the index has continued to extend higher.  From 948 low, the index extended higher in wave ((1)), which ended at 1374 high.  This is followed by a pullback in wave ((2)), which unfolded as a zig-zag and ended at 1175 low. The index has managed to continue to extend higher from that low. Now, it shows an incomplete bullish sequence after it manages to break above the previous wave ((1)) high. The 100% -161.8% extension of wave ((1))-((2)) where next leg higher can target is between 1605-1866 area.
The 4 hour chart below shows that the index is currently within wave (3) of ((3)).  From 1175 low, wave (1) ended at 1356 high. The pullback is wave (2) ended at 1316 low. Afterwards, the index continued to extend higher and ended wave 1 at 1440 high. The rally broke above previous wave ((1)) high to confirm that the next leg higher has started. Wave 2 pullback unfolded as a flat and ended at 1368 low. From there, RTY_F has managed to make new highs.  As long as the pivot at 1175 low stays intact, expect the dips in 3,7, or 11 swings to be supported for more upside. The index then has the scope to continue higher until it reaches the equal leg blue box area in the Daily chart.
FURTHER DISCLOSURES AND DISCLAIMER CONCERNING RISK, RESPONSIBILITY
Trading in the Foreign Exchange market is a challenging opportunity where above average returns are available for educated and experienced investors who are willing to take above average risk.
However, before deciding to participate in Foreign Exchange (FX) trading, you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of  xperience and risk appetite. Do not invest or trade capital you cannot afford to lose. EME PROCESSING AND CONSULTING, LLC, THEIR REPRESENTATIVES, AND ANYONE WORKING FOR OR WITHIN WWW.ELLIOTTWAVE- FORECAST.COM is not responsible for any loss from any form of distributed advice, signal,
Again, we fully DISCLOSE to the Subscriber base that the Service as a whole, the individual Parties, Representatives, or owners shall not be liable to any and all Subscribers for any losses or damages as a result of any action taken by the Subscriber from any trade idea or signal posted on
the website(s) distributed through any form of social-media, email, the website, and/or any other electronic, written, verbal, or future form of communication . All analysis, trading signals, trading recommendations, all charts, communicated interpretations of the wave counts, and all content from any media form produced by www.Elliottwave-forecast.com and/or the Representatives are solely the opinions and best efforts of the respective author(s).
In general Forex instruments are highly leveraged, and traders can lose some or all of their initial margin funds. All content provided by www.Elliottwave-forecast.com is expressed in good faith and is intended to help Subscribers succeed in the marketplace, but it is never guaranteed. There is no “holy grail” to trading or forecasting the market and we are wrong sometimes like everyone else.
Please understand and accept the risk involved when making any trading and/or investment decision.
UNDERSTAND that all the content we provide is protected through copyright of EME PROCESSING AND CONSULTING, LLC. It is illegal to disseminate in any form of communication any part or all of our proprietary information without specific authorization.
UNDERSTAND that you also agree to not allow persons that are not PAID SUBSCRIBERS to view any of the content not released publicly. IF YOU ARE FOUND TO BE IN VIOLATION OF THESE RESTRICTIONS you or your firm (as the Subscriber) will be charged fully with no discount for one year  subscription to our Premium Plus Plan at $1,799.88 for EACH person or firm
who received any of our content illegally through the respected intermediary’s (Subscriber in violation of terms) channel(s) of communication.
