Jockey Russell Baze  waves to the crowd after winning the fourth race at Bay Meadows in San Mateo, Calif., Friday, Dec. 1, 2006. It was Baze’s 9,531st victory to eclipse Laffit Pincay Jr.’s career record. 
(Editor’s note: This story was originally published in 2000. Baze has since become the winningest jockey in North American history. He retired in 2016 with 12,844 victories)
PLEASANTON — Russell Baze rode the appropriately named This Is The Moment to victory in the Pleasanton Stakes on Tuesday at the Alameda County Fair to become the sixth thoroughbred jockey to post 7,000 victories.
Baze won a stretch-long duel with Peteski’s Charm, ridden by Roberto Gonzalez, Northern California’s second winningest rider with more than 3,000 wins, to notch the victory in the 1 1/16-mile race by one-half length in 1:43.60.
This Is The Moment is trained by Jerry Hollendorfer, who earned his 2,999th victory with the triumph.
The fans, perhaps bolstered by hunch players, made This Is The Moment the heavy favorite. He returned $5, and Baze was warmly greeted as he returned to the winner’s circle and again as he walked along the track to the jockey’s room after special ceremonies to commemorate the milestone victory.
Hollendorfer was smiling as Baze came to the winner’s circle with This Is The Moment. Asked if he wanted to saddle Baze’s 7,000th winner, Hollendorfer said, “I did. I got 6,000 for him (with Clover Hunter at Golden Gate Fields in 1997). We kinda came together. We both have the same outlook. We try to win all the time. That’s why we’re pretty good together.”
Jockey Russell Baze smiles before racing in the sixth race, which Baze won, at Bay Meadows in San Mateo, Calif., Thursday, Nov. 30, 2006. It was Baze’s 9,530th victory to tie Laffit Pincay Jr.’s career record. (AP Photo/Jeff Chiu)
Victory No. 6,999 for Baze came four races earlier aboard the Hollendorfer-trained Flying Denouement.
Two races after his 7,000th victory, Baze tried to get Hollendorfer into the spotlight with a milestone win of his own but could only finish third aboard Virtual Light.
“It was really nice to (reach the milestone) in the stake,” Baze, 41, said. “Any time you win a stake, that’s special.”
But Baze conceded it also was nice Hollendorfer was in the winner’s circle with him for the milestone victory.
“Yeah, OK,” he said. “There are a lot of guys who supported me, and there was nobody today (he had five mounts for Hollendorfer, one for brother-in-law Lonnie Arterburn, one for Greg Gilchrist and one for Tom Roberts), I wouldn’t have felt good about winning for.
“Jerry’s really supported me. It was nice getting it with him.
While This Is The Moment probably benefited from the scratch of morning-line favorite Langston, the improving 3-year-old ran a strong race after hopping at the start when the gate opened.
Patience is one of Baze’s strongest suits, and he let his colt settle in well behind runaway leader Fight For Silver. He had plenty of horse as Gonzalez aboard Peteski’s Charm collared Fight For Silver on the far turn and looked in perfect striking position.
“I was a little worried if I’d get to Bobby’s horse,” Baze said. “He looked like he was moving pretty well.”
Another of Baze’s strong suits is his competitiveness, and he wasn’t about to concede anything with three-sixteenths of a mile to run.
“His horse got to playing around a little, and I thought we had a chance,” Baze said.
Another of Baze’s traits is the ability to finish strong, and he did as Gonzalez did everything he could to urge Peteski’s Charm on but couldn’t hold off Baze and This Is The Moment.
Though they don’t know for sure how many races they’ve won together, Hollendorfer estimates Baze has won more than 1,000 times for him.
“We have a good business relationship, but we’re friends, too,” Hollendorfer said. “We don’t pal around. He usually tends to business, then goes home to his family, and that’s what I do, too.
“He comes out and works a lot of horses for me, and we talk about a lot of things.
Baze also has the respect of his fellow riders.
“I rode eight years in New York and saw every good rider that came through there,” Dennis Carr said. “I’d put Russell up against any of them.
“From a riding standpoint, no one has his desire, but outside of the races, he’s just your everyday Joe.”
Baze should move past Angel Cordero Jr. (7,037 victories) before the summer finishes, and talk of him catching Laffit Pincay Jr., who is currently closing in on 9,000 victories, is not out of the question.
Baze doesn’t deny he’d like to pass Pincay “I wish he’d retire and stop winning all those races,” he said, jokingly and says he’ll ride as long as he remains healthy.
Today is a dark day for racing, but it will still be a busy day for Baze. He’s scheduled to drive 40-some miles from his home in Woodside to Golden Gate Fields in Albany to work horses. Which probably explains why 7,000 will not be Baze’s last milestone.
