The Russell 2000 index, which tracks the 2,000 small-cap companies in the United States, advances in a first bullish sequence after the massive sell-off that began in mid-February 2020.
The Russell 2000, in its log-scale weekly chart, shows a five-wave bullish sequence of Intermediate degree labeled in blue, which in turn completed a Primary impulsive wave identified in black.
This first wave of Primary grade began in early March when it found buyers in the 341.76 pts and completed its bullish sequence in early September 2018 when it reached its record high at 1,745.39 points.
Currently, the Elliott wave big picture shows Russell 2000 developing a second corrective wave of Primary degree in black. This wave remains in progress, and we observe that it is advancing in its second internal segment corresponding to wave (B) of Intermediate degree in blue.
The first corrective wave composed of three internal waves ended in mid-March aided by the massive sell-off by the virus, and the oil price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia corresponds to a flat pattern.
Considering the principle of alternation, that tells that if the first correction of a corrective structure corresponds to a flat pattern, the second corrective structure should be a triangle or a zigzag pattern.
On the other hand, based on the Elliott wave theory, it is likely that wave (B) in blue would correspond to a triangle pattern.
According to the Elliott Wave Theory, a triangle is a corrective structure with five internal divisions overlapping one each other, with each segment having three waves. This formation tends to appear in a wave 4 or B.
Given that in early November this year, presidential elections will take place in the United States, It is possible that the corrective Wave (B) structure in blue could continue to the period of the United States elections. This context could give way to the last bearish movement, which corresponds to the wave (C) (blue).
Finally, considering that the wave (A) did not penetrate the end of wave (4) of the first upward wave located at 938.18 points, it is also likely that the next wave (C) won't extend below this level.
In conclusion, in the short-term, the Russell 200 bias remains in the bullish side until it completes the end of the wave (B). In the long term, however, the main vision remains bearish, waiting for the development of a new five-wave bearish movement corresponding to the wave (C) of Intermediate degree in blue.
Try Secure Leveraged Trading with EagleFX!
Risk Warning: CFD and Spot Forex trading both come with a high degree of risk. You must be prepared to sustain a total loss of any funds deposited with us, as well as any additional losses, charges, or other costs we incur in recovering any payment from you. Given the possibility of losing more than your entire investment, speculation in certain investments should only be conducted with risk capital funds that if lost will not significantly affect your personal or institution’s financial well-being. Before deciding to trade the products offered by us, you should carefully consider your objectives, financial situation, needs and level of experience. You should also be aware of all the risks associated with trading on margin.
