The market has finally noticed the value in Small Caps (chart below, iShares Russell 2000 ETF (NYSE: IWM )) and added nearly 5% in a drive towards its 200-day MA. The index is still lagging a long way behind the NASDAQ and S&P but has at least enjoyed a relative performance advantage.
The S&P managed to make a breakout on higher volume accumulation. Although the price gain was relatively modest, it did manage to edge beyond the February swing low. The 200-day MA is the next target. Supporting technicals are bullish, although it continues to lose relative ground against the Russell 2000 .
The NASDAQ was in the middle of the action with a 3.5% gain as it works its way towards the February swing high. If it gets that far, then the next target is the February gap down and then all-time highs; the latter feels like a stretch but the market does what the market does.
Supporting the NASDAQ was the gain in the Semiconductor Index . The index is knocking off the various resistance levels and is now left with just the February breakdown gap before all-time highs are again challenged.
The rally continues and despite the negativity in the news cycle the market keeps climbing higher. Small Caps are finally seeing some traction and this is important for the sustainability of the rally.
Russell 2000 Finally Seeing Traction; S&P 500 Breakout On Higher Volume
Russell 2000 Finally Seeing Traction; S&P 500 Breakout On Higher Volume
We encourage you to use comments to engage with users, share your perspective and ask questions of authors and each other. However, in order to maintain the high level of discourse we’ve all come to value and expect, please keep the following criteria in mind:
Stay focused and on track. Only post material that’s relevant to the topic being discussed.
Be respectful. Even negative opinions can be framed positively and diplomatically.
Use standard writing style. Include punctuation and upper and lower cases.
Avoid profanity, slander or personal attacks directed at an author or another user.
Don’t Monopolize the Conversation. We appreciate passion and conviction, but we also believe strongly in giving everyone a chance to air their thoughts. Therefore, in addition to civil interaction, we expect commenters to offer their opinions succinctly and thoughtfully, but not so repeatedly that others are annoyed or offended. If we receive complaints about individuals who take over a thread or forum, we reserve the right to ban them from the site, without recourse.
Only English comments will be allowed.
Perpetrators of spam or abuse will be deleted from the site and prohibited from future registration at Investing.com’s discretion.
I have read Investing.com's comments guidelines and agree to the terms described.
