“What caught our attention wasn’t the sports bettors or doctors trading, but the high-volume, wild price action in bankrupt shares that made us feel the public’s participation was getting frothy,” Emanuel says.
The most prominent example : Hertz Global Holdings (ticker: HTZ), which bounced again this past week on news that it is selling much of its used-car fleet. The latest move in the bankrupt auto rental outfit’s shares made no more sense than their earlier pop after the company had filed for chapter 11, because the sales proceeds would go to holders of Hertz’s asset-backed securities, as our colleague Alexandra Scaggs has reported .
This reminds Emanuel of the dot-com bubble days of 1999-2000, which imparted another lesson: “The public’s participation can go on a lot longer and remain more intense than one might expect.”
A morning briefing on what you need to know in the day ahead, including exclusive commentary from Barron's and MarketWatch writers.
It might seem hard to reconcile the disconnect between the huge rally, with the S&P 500 nearly 11% below its record high, and double-digit unemployment and coronavirus infections surging across the South and West. But, the BTIG strategist observes, that’s not so surprising, given the massive stimulation provided by the Federal Reserve and fiscal policy from Washington.
Historically low interest rates—with the Fed officially pegging its federal funds target near zero, and de facto yield-curve control keeping Treasury note yields in tight ranges, with the 10-year benchmark hovering near 0.70%—is offered as a justification for high stock price/earnings multiples. But low interest rates are warning that something is wrong, avers Peter Cecchini, former chief market strategist at Cantor Fitzgerald.
The risk is contagion through the financial system, as defaults lead to tighter lending standards, he continues. The Fed’s support of the corporate bond market has boosted stocks. But justifying equities’ buoyant prices by ignoring the current profit collapse in favor of 2021 or 2022 earnings expectations recalls the valuation paradigms of past bubbles. Remember 1999, when some internet stocks traded on multiples of “eyeballs,” or 2006, when sky-high house prices would never decline?
Even if this time is different (yet another market adage, one that ought to flash a yellow light to investors), both strategists think caution should be the byword. They suggest similar options strategies to lock in gains and protect against giving them back. What they don’t recommend are blithely bullish strategies that expose options traders to open-ended losses if the advance reverses into retreat.
Given the public’s power to push prices higher, Emanuel doesn’t think it’s time to sell stocks short. Instead, he suggests monetizing the surge in the Nasdaq-100 big tech stocks and small-caps, which “have run a mile.”
That could be done by writing, or selling, call options on the Invesco QQQ Trust (QQQ) and iShares Russell 2000 (IWM) exchange-traded funds, against long positions in those stocks or ETFs made up of them. (A call conveys the right to buy a stock at a specified strike price. The seller of the call receives a premium, but gives up the opportunity to profit if the underlying stock rises above the strike price.)
Contracts expiring in August with strike prices 10%-15% above current stock quotes would cap potential gains if the shares rise, but also would provide generous income if the market takes a breather after its strong run. Cecchini agrees that, if you’re holding large-cap stocks that have climbed, selling expensive calls on the S&P 500—represented by the SPDR S&P 500 ETF (SPY)—makes sense.
As Covid-19 Surges, Uncertainties Return Over Federal Relief, the Recovery, and the Election
The premium income from call writing provides only limited protection against market declines. Both strategists also suggest hedging with put options, which confer the right to sell a stock at the strike price, thus protecting against further losses. They recommend put spreads—buying one put and selling another—to cut the cost of the downside insurance.
Emanuel suggests buying at-the-money puts in the QQQ and IWM and selling further out-of-the-money puts, along with the aforementioned call sale. This “collar” would benefit from the greed in the market, reflected in relatively strong prices for upside calls relative to puts. That’s the reverse of the usual “skew,” in which hedgers pay up for downside put protection. Cecchini favors a QQQ put spread, buying the 235 put and selling the 215 strike, both for July expiration.
Neither option maven recommends going farther out on the calendar because of the elevated expense to hedge against the other big uncertainty: the outcome of November’s election. In any case, between the economy and Covid-19, there’s enough risk to hedge in the near term.
Peter Cecchini recommends a put spread on the Invesco QQQ Trust ETF, buying the 235 put and selling the 215 strike, both for July expiration. An earlier version of this column incorrectly said the trade involved selling the 235 put and buying the 215 strike.
The Stock Market Is Set for One of Its Best Quarters in Decades. Time to Prepare for the Worst.
The bigger the drop, the bigger the pop, according to one market maxim.
