The direction of the June U.S. Dollar Index the rest of the session on Friday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to  99.690.
The U.S. Dollar is trading higher against a basket of major currencies on Friday, extending yesterday’s gains, after U.S.-China tensions boosted demand for s afe-haven currencies.
U.S.-China relations have been strained during the coronavirus pandemic. The U.S. has ramped up its criticism of China, blaming it for the spread of the virus, which originated in Wuhan.
At 09:32 GMT, June U.S. Dollar Index futures are trading 99.830, up 0.427 or +0.43%.
Last week, the U.S. government moved to block global chip supplies to blacklisted telecoms equipment maker Huawei Technologies. This week, the U.S. Senate also passed legislation that could prevent some Chinese companies from listing their shares on U.S. exchanges .
On Friday, renewed tensions between the U.S. and China following a new national security law in Hong Kong dented investor sentiment, sending investors into the safety of the U.S. Dollar.
The main trend is down according to the daily swing chart. A trade through 99.005 will signal a resumption of the downtrend. The main trend will change to up on a trade through 100.605.
The main range is 94.530 to 103.960. Its retracement zone at 99.245 to 98.130 is major support.
The short-term range is 98.345 to 101.030. Its 50% level at 99.690 is likely to act like a pivot today.
On the upside, the longer-term 50% level comes in at 101.495.
Based on the early price action and the current price at 99.830, the direction of the June U.S. Dollar Index the rest of the session on Friday is likely to be determined by trader reaction to the short-term 50% level at 99.690.
A sustained move over 99.690 will indicate the presence of aggressive counter-trend buyers. Investor sentiment is likely to drive the price action. There is minor resistance at 99.994. Overcoming this level will put the index in a position to challenge the main top at 100.605.
A sustained move under 99.690 will signal the presence of sellers. This could trigger a quick break into the main 50% level at 99.245. If this fails to hold then look for the selling to possibly extend into the minor bottom at 99.005.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
