shares jumped 8.78% to close at $15.48. About 50,623 shares traded hands on 818 trades for the day, compared with an average daily volume of 
n/a shares out of a total float of 8.37 million. After opening the trading day at $14.47, shares of Westwood Holdings Group Inc stayed within a range of $15.79 to 
and $10.50 over the last year, and it had a 50-day SMA of $n/a and a 200-day SMA of $n/a.
Westwood Holdings Group Inc through its subsidiaries is engaged in managing investment assets and providing services for its clients. The company operates its business through the Advisory and Trust segments. Its advisory segment provides investment advisory services to corporate retirement plans, public retirement plans, endowments, foundations, individuals and the Westwood Funds, as well as investment sub-advisory services to mutual funds and its trust segment. The Trust segment offers trust and custodial services to its clients and to its advisory segment and sponsors common trust funds to institutions and high net worth individuals. It generates maximum revenue from the Advisory segment. The company has a presence in Asia, Australia, Canada, Europe, and the United States.
Westwood Holdings Group Inc is based out of Dallas, TX and has some 165 employees. Its CEO is Brian O. Casey.
For a complete fundamental analysis of Westwood Holdings Group Inc, check out Equities.com’s Stock Valuation Analysis report for 
Still paying commissions on stock trades? Equities.com now offers $7.99/month unlimited trading and flat-fee options trading for $89.99/month! Get started today by https://www.equities.com/trading-start
Westwood Holdings Group Inc is also a component of the Russell 2000. The Russell 2000 is one of the leading indices tracking small-cap companies in the United States. It's maintained by  Russell 
Investments, an industry leader in creating and maintaining indices, and consists of the smallest 2000 stocks from the broader Russell 3000 index.
Russell's indices differ from traditional indices like the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) or S&P 500, whose members are selected by committee, because they base membership entirely on an 
objective, rules based methodology. The 3,000 largest companies by market cap make up the Russell 3000, with the 2,000 smaller companies making up the Russell 2000. It's a simple approach that gives 
a broad, unbiased look at the small-cap market as a whole.
To get more information on Westwood Holdings Group Inc and to follow the company’s latest updates, you can visit the company’s profile page here: WHG’s Profile . For more news on the financial markets and emerging growth companies, be sure to visit Equities.com’s 
email newsletter to ensure you don’t miss out on any of our best stories.
All data provided by QuoteMedia and was accurate as of 4:30PM ET.
DISCLOSURE: The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors, and do not represent the views of equities.com . Readers should not consider statements made by the author as formal recommendations and should consult their financial advisor before making any investment decisions. To read our full disclosure, please go to: http://www.equities.com/disclaimer
