Corn has suffered the biggest decline in the grain sector during the month of August, with prices down a second month in a row — giving back gains seen in the first half of the year.
Corn futures US:CZ19 traded in Chicago are down more than 9% month to date as of Wednesday. The Bloomberg Agriculture Subindex, which reflects the return of underlying commodity futures price movements, including corn, was down nearly 5% in August so far, according to FactSet data. It’s lost almost 10% year to date.
Based on most-active contracts, corn is down 0.9% for the year to date, more than erasing a summer rally caused by delayed plantings as a result of an extremely wet spring. The decline is likely to cause more heartburn for farmers, with the agricultural economy continuing to take lumps as a result of the U.S.-China trade war and rough weather.
Read: Trump’s tariffs and bad weather take toll on U.S. farmers
Corn has largely been under pressure since the release of the June plantings report from the U.S. Department of Agriculture , said Sal Gilbertie, president and chief investment offer at Teucrium Trading. The government upwardly revised its estimate for 2019 planted corn acreage in June, estimating corn plantings at 91.7 million acres, up 3% from last year.
Flooding in the spring had caused planting delays that were “widely expected to have caused many farmers to plant soybeans instead of corn,” said Gilbertie.
Soybeans are generally planted two to four weeks later than corn, but many farmers chose to plant corn late in the season instead, he said. The “decision to plant corn instead of soybeans was undoubtedly influenced by the trade war with China, our largest buyer of soybeans,” and that led to “unexpectedly high levels of planted corn acres.”
In a mid-August report, the USDA forecast a 13.9 billion bushel corn crop, up 26 million bushels from a July projection and much larger than expected.
The larger-than-expected corn plantings combined with U.S.-China trade frictions, “lower ethanol demand and reduced demand for corn as a result of depleted Chinese hog stocks,” to push corn prices lower, said Jeff Klearman, portfolio manager at exchange-traded fund issuer GraniteShares. African Swine Fever decimated China’s hog population and cut demand for feed.
Just how much corn the plantings will yield remains the key question. Skeptics contend the USDA’s projections are overly optimistic.
“The USDA numbers are a far cry to what I have seen in the fields…the crop is just not there this year,” said Daniel Flynn, market analyst at Price Futures Group. “Certain investors expect a harvest cyclical selloff but with late plantings, I can’t believe we will see good [corn crop] yields, let alone a bumper crop in size.” Flynn says corn may rally to $4 a bushel by the time the USDA releases its next crop production report on Sept. 12. It settled at $3.71 on Wednesday.
Weather will also play a key role. “We could have an early frost and if that happens, this stressed crop will be long gone,” said Flynn.
Gilbertie agreed that the market will be “vulnerable to any weather event this fall because crops were planted late this year, and any perceived resolution of the trade war could also have a significant effect on grain prices moving forward.”
Soybean futures US:SX19, by comparison, saw more tempered declines for the month, down 1.8%, even as farmers remained concerned about significantly reduced demand for the commodity from China. Soybeans are down 3.3% so far this year, bouncing back after hitting a 12-year low in the spring.
The U.S. soybean crop “does not look good this year,” said Flynn. The USDA estimated domestic soybean planted area for 2019 at 80 million acres, down 10% from last year—the lowest U.S. soybean planted acreage since 2013.
Meanwhile, wheat futures US:WZ19 were down over 2% in the month to date as of Wednesday, pressured by global oversupply concerns, according to Klearman. The USDA in August lifted its estimated domestic 2019/2020 wheat production by 59 million bushels to 1.98 billion bushels.
Overall, however, “grain prices will continue to be affected by global growth concerns and U.S.-China trade frictions, lowering demand expectations as long as these concerns exist,” said Klearman.
He’s 34 years old and owns $550 million worth of Apple — so why is he hoping the stock gets hammered, again?
“I learned from dad when I was 13. He showed me a chart comparing real estate to stock market returns, and it was really easy decision. I’ve been doing it ever since,” he said. “But it’s hard for me to find things I like and find attractive.”
