Sharp Increase in corn MSP, below-average monsoon and pest-related issues (Fall Armyworm) have pushed up corn prices in India to nearly Rs 20-21 per kg (up nearly 80 per cent YoY); at all-time high.
"While the company has effected price hikes for its commodity products (starch and liquid glucose), we believe it will pass on RM cost surge for its value added starch derivatives gradually at the time of contract renewal given that it is largely a local business with negligible imports. We lower our FY20E Ebitda by 7 per cent to account for this," said the brokerage.
GAEX’s corn segment exports, which will end in Q1FY20, hurt its margin in Q4FY19 as they were contracted at a lower rate and corn prices shot up.
Moreover, the company is getting traction in soybean meal exports to Iran. Also, starch derivatives from the Chalisgaon plant should start contributing in the second half of FY20E, which will give a further fillip to revenue and margin.
"We believe corn availability is not a big issue given, only nearly 15 per cent of India’s corn goes into starch production and GAEX’s proximity to corn-producing belts and its sourcing capabilities (2 per cent higher gross margin than peers). We believe profit margins will rise again as customers adjust to the shift in cost curve, and corn production rebounds," the brokerage said.
All-time high corn prices led to lower profitability and higher working capital requirement across the industry.
The brokerage slightly pared its FY20E and FY21E earnings per share (EPS) estimates by 10 per cent and 6 per cent, respectively, reflecting lower short-term profitability in the corn segment.
However, the company's industry dominance, improving product mix and capital allocation are major positives for the company, said the brokerage.
"We like GAEX due to its industry dominance (nearly 25 per cent of India’s corn processing capacity), improving product mix (corn segment Ebitda: nearly 79 per cent of total in FY21E against nearly 60 per cent in FY18), efficient RM procurement, and capital allocation discipline (debt-free; all capex funded through internal accruals). We maintain a strong buy with a target price of Rs 330, based on 15 times-FY21E EPS," the brokerage said.
Raw material price and availability,trade tariffs and increase in supply by other players are the key risks for the stock, said the brokerage.
