In WESTLAKE VILLAGE, the organic cafe Urban Vejjie opened June 23 at The Shoppes at Westlake Village address vacated by Greens Up! in August ( 30760 Russell Ranch Road, Suite B , 818-699-6484, http://www.urbanvejjie.com ).
Canceled by COVID-19, the May 8 Sunset Pier Dinner has turned into Sunset on the Pier, a semi-DIY event set for July 31.
At 5 p.m., ticket holders will be invited to stroll the Ventura Pier while sipping wine from Four Brix Winery and a special cocktail from Channel Islands Distillery. After picking up a gourmet dinner to take home from Lorraine Lim Catering, they can tune in for a virtual tour of the pier.
Tickets, $100 per person, will benefit the nonprofit organization Pier Into the Future and its efforts to preserve the historic pier. The group's other annual fundraiser,
In downtown Ventura, the Spring Wine Walk and Street Fair originally scheduled for March 28 has morphed into the Summer Wine Walk and Street Fair , rescheduled for Aug.1 by the event's presenter, CBF Productions. (The new event date was still "on" as of the deadline for this column.) The free street fair will run from 11 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. The ticketed wine walk ($50-$75) will take place from 3 to 6 p.m. ( https://www.springwinewalk.com ).
The Santa Barbara Wine + Food Festival originally scheduled for June and then postponed until August is now canceled. The event will return June 26, 2021, on the grounds of the Santa Barbara Museum of Natural History , for which it is a fundraiser.
Current ticket holders have the option of converting their 2020 tickets into a donation to the museum, applying their tickets to the purchase of tickets for next year's festival or requesting a full or partial refund. Call 805-682-4711, ext. 110 or send an email to sclement@sbnature2.org by July 30 to state your preference ( https://www.sbnature.org ).
Two nonprofit food organizations in Ventura County have announcements to make:
The Abundant Table , a faith-based organization that for several years has farmed some of the land — and operated the organic produce stand — at McGrath Family Farm in Camarillo, said in May that it has restructured to become a nonprofit worker collective.
An email sent to supporters states that the goal is "to have an equitable say in the decisions that affect how we relate to the farm, to our community, to Mother Earth, and to each other ... a democratic workplace where all of us propose ideas, deliberate toward consensus and carry out the decisions we make, always with a view toward the benefit of our collective vision rather than to any one of us individually."
It also named Reyna Ortega, a "longtime Abundant Table farmworker and spiritual guide," as the collective's interim executive director.
For information about The Abundant Table's community-supported agriculture boxes, pick-your-own-strawberry fields and other farm programs, click on https://theabundanttable.org .
Food Share of Ventura County has a new chief operating officer following the June 12 retirement of Susan Haverland after seven years with the organization.
The new COO is Kevin Drabinski, formerly chief executive officer of the Food Bank Coalition of San Luis Obispo County. He previously served as senior field representative for California’s 35th State Assembly office, where he led constituent engagement and policy outreach with business, agricultural, public safety and educational interests ( https://foodshare.com ).
As they say on the internets, I have some personal news.
My mother was diagnosed with cancer in late May. A related surgical procedure kept her in the hospital until last week, when she was released just in time for her 82nd birthday. With coronavirus cases spiking, our family made the decision to bring her directly home, where she can be among her books and roses and crossword puzzles, with her cat on her lap and me as her caretaker.
This means that my weekly Cafe Society column and its Business-section companion, Open & Shut, will be on hiatus for an indefinite period of time.
Your good thoughts are welcome.
