U.S. planting is advancing nicely in corn (51% planted, 12% ahead of normal) and soybeans (23% planted, 12% ahead), but not HRS wheat (29% planted, 14% behind). Other crops are less impressive, with sorghum 22% planted (4% behind), rice 49% planted (15% behind), sugar beets 49% planted (14% behind), and barley 41% planted (11% behind). Essentially, the Corn Belt has early planting, while the rest of the U.S. is behind in most other crops. Soil moisture supplies are dwindling fast (which is why we have rapid Corn Belt planting), with 5% less topsoil rated adequate/surplus (80% total this week) and 3% less subsoil (86% surplus). Still, the soils are quite moist compared with most years, so the dry weather pattern has time to change.
Overall, the crop outlook (supply) still looks good but the demand is in question – more from the virus than from other issues. Perhaps the greatest uncertainty is the U.S./world economy as the pandemic has left large portions of it in shambles (including energy/ethanol), with a future that is uncertain. That leaves grain and livestock outlooks – regardless of our traditional supply/demand indicators – extremely uncertain. If the U.S. slides into a depression (which all indications are pointing to), it could bring ridiculous market implications such as the negative oil prices we recently experienced. Chaos like that in markets is usually a catastrophe – one that most everyone would like to avoid.
Pro Ag notes that commodity prices are now essentially the lowest in about 20 years collectively, with crude oil making new lows in negative territory. Live cattle are the lowest in 11 years, feeder cattle lowest in 10 years, hogs at 18-year lows, corn 12-year lows, and soybeans were lower only once in the past 12 years (during initial tariff time, May ’19).
If there is a bright spot, it’s wheat, which is in the bottom third of
historic prices but actually higher than most of the past three years. So only the bread of “bread and butter” is doing relatively well.
In contrast, the entire economy is crying about the stock market. Yet,
stocks are actually doing much better than commodities as the low in March was equal to the Nov16 price – essentially a 3.5-year low. And we’ve already recovered to the level where we’ve only been higher for about two years in all of history. The question is, are we on the road to recovery and back to the highs with the reopening of the economy this month? Or is the stock market headed for another tumble lower? The U.S. economy might drive almost every industry in the U.S. right now, as the problems caused by the virus treatment are enormous. Just ask the energy market – or ethanol plants – both are experiencing real pain.
Ray is President of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc., a top Ranked
marketing firm in the country.  See http://www.progressiveag.com for
rankings and link to data from Top Producer Magazine and Agweb.com.
agent of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc. and is, or is in the nature
Progressive Ag Marketing's Research Department. By accepting
futures markets, capable of making independent trading decisions, and
agree that you are not, and will not, rely solely on this
communication in making trading decisions.
COMMUNICATION SHOULD NOT BE CONSIDERED A SOLICITATION.
simulated historical tests of strategies, is not indicative of future
accurate or complete and it should not be relied upon as such. Trading
subject to change without notice. There is no guarantee that advice we
give will result in profitable trades.
