The 2020 planting season is off to a rapid pace. USDA reported 67% of the nation's corn crop has been planted in Monday's Crop Progress report. That's ahead of the five-year average of 56%.
However, last week's weather was not as favorable for corn planting. Many states recorded low temperatures below freezing.
Average temperatures in Colorado ranged from the low 60s to high 30s. Last week brought above-average temperatures to the southeast corner of the state whil the northeast corner was below average.
Illinois farmers had temperatures 6 to 13° F below-average last week.
Temperatures in Indiana were 7 to 12° F below-average last week. The northern part of the state recorded minimum low temperatures in the high 20s.
Last week, average temperatures across most of Iowa were in the high 40s to low 50s.
Iowa leads the nation in planting progress with 91% of its corn crop in the ground.
“Planting has moved at a near-record pace this spring and with that comes the risk of a late frost. Most of the state was under frost and freeze warnings over the weekend and some stations set new record lows,” said Iowa Secretary of Agriculture Mike Naig. “We expect warmer and wetter weather towards the end of the week, which is welcome news for farmers who are closely monitoring emerging corn and soybean crops.”
Low temperatures were not as bad as forecasted for farmer Blaine Groth in Tama County. “Some corn in the really low areas got nipped just barely. We're not expecting any negative impacts though,” he said.
Average temperatures ranged from the mid 50s to low 60s in Kansas last week. Other than the southwest corner of the state, these temperatuers were below-average for this time of year.
Kentucky also had below-average temperatures statewide last week. Usually temperatures are 5 to 12° F warmer this time of year. A number of eastern counties recorded lows below 32° F.
Statewide, Michigan temperatures were well below-average last week. Some parts of the state saw temperatures up to 20° F below normal. It got down to 19° F in the upper peninusla.
Minnesota temperatures were also below-average statewide last week. Lows in the mid to low 20s were recorded in the northern half of the state.
Missouri farmers had average temperatures 4 to 11° F below normal last week. Low temperatures stayed above freezing in nearly the whole state.
Corn planting is now 67% complete in Missouri, but remains behind the five-year average of 78%.
Average temperatures were below normal for this time of year by as much as 4° F in the west and 10° F in the eastern part of Nebraska. Low temperatures dipped below 32° F in many northern counties.
Corn planting is now 79% complete in Nebraska, ahead of the five-year average of 60%. Last week 61% of the state's corn crop had been planted.
Last week average temperatures ranged from the mid 60s to low 50s in North Carolina. This is up to 8° F below-average for this time of year. A handful of southern counties recorded more than 2 inches of rain.
North Carolina planting progress is just a hair ahead of the five-year average pace with 89% of the state's corn crop in the ground. That is a gain of 10% since last week.
North Dakota recorded below-average temperatuers by as much as 11° F last week. Snow was reported in many northen counties.
Corn planting progress is still in the single digits for North Dakota. Accordint to Monday's report 7% of the state's corn crop is in the ground compared with 4% last week. Last year was challenging for North Dakota farmers, too. Just 9% of their corn was planted this time last year. The five-year average is 38%.
Average temperatuers were 7 to 12° F below-average statewide in Ohio last week. Snow was reported in the northeast corner of the state.
Ohio's corn planting progress jumped up to 33% from 10% last week. It remains behind the five-year average of 36%.
Statewide, temperatures were 3 to 15° F below-average in Pennsylvania last week. More than an inch of snow was reported in a few northern counties.
Pennsylvania farmers got an additional 4% of the corn crop in the ground last week for a total of 5% of corn planted. The five-year average for this point in the season is 32%.
Average temperatures in South Dakota barely broke 50° F in the southeast corner of the state last week. Statewide, temperatures averaged 3 to 10° F below normal for this time of year.
South Dakota is halfway done planting corn and ahead of the five-year average of 38%. Planting is way ahead of last year when just 3% of the crop was in the ground at this point in the season.
Temperatures were below-average across the state of Tennessee last week, too. A line of counties stretching from the northwest corner to the southeast corner of the state recorded 2 to 3+ inches of rain.
Tennessee corn planting progress is behind the five-year average with 67% of its corn in the ground. That's up from 54% of corn planted last week.
Texas had above-average temperatures in the west-central part of the state, but most of the state had temps 0 to 4° F below normal last week.
The Lonestar state is ahead of the five-year corn planting average with 84% of its crop in the ground. That's up from 69% last week and 74% a year ago.
Wisconsin had temperatures of 7 to 12° F below-average across the state last week.
Despite the cooler temperatures, Wisconsin corn planting jumped ahead of the five-year average with 59% of the corn crop planted.
