Corn Fiber Market value to hit $1.4 billion by 2026, Says Global Market Insights, Inc.
Global corn fiber market revenue is projected to register over 13% CAGR from 2020 to 2026, driven by growing consumer inclination towards healthy, natural and low-calorie ingredients.
Global corn fiber market is projected to cross USD 1.4 billion by 2026, according to a new research report by Global Market Insights, Inc. Changing consumer preference towards slower sugar and higher fiber ingredients favored by rapid investment by industry players to capitalize on emerging business trends is likely to boost global industry demand.
Increasing demand for natural ingredients in industry coupled with changing consumer behavior patterns on sustainability measures should boost product demand. Corn fiber is produced from corn through enzymatic hydrolysis of corn starch. Factors such as high production levels, low cost availability, and synergy between countries regarding import and export of corn ingredient will propel the corn fiber market outlook.
Better moisture regaining properties as compared to polyester makes the product highly comfortable. Additionally, key aspects such as good elasticity as well as full luster makes the product suitable for apparel applications. The product finds major application in t-shirts, jeans, and sportwear.
Some major findings of corn fiber market analysis report include:
Industry players are rapidly investing in R&D, importing machines from Europe & U.S. and developing ingenious technology to gain unique selling point in market
Easy availability of corn, rapid product penetration in market, and easy availability of labor in developing countries is making manufacturers to increase production
Manufacturers are developing new products to meet the demands in the textile sector. They are offering corn fiber in both spun and filamentous forms to produce superior-quality light fabrics which should boost market demand
Some of the major players operating in corn fiber market include Archer Daniels Midland Company, Cargill Incorporated, Tate & Lyle, and Ingredion
Browse key industry insights spread across 260 pages with 275 market data tables and 10  figures & charts from the report, “Corn Fiber Market Statistics By Application (Food, Beverages, Pharmaceutical, Animal Nutrition, Textile), Industry Analysis Report, Regional Outlook, Application Potential, Price Trends, Competitive Market Share & Forecast, 2019 – 2026” in detail along with the table of contents:
Increasing demand for corn fibers as a value-added ingredient will drive the Asia Pacific demand. Rising health concerns regarding nutrient-rich diet among young generation in China, India and Japan will drive corn fiber market growth. Ongoing technical advancements coupled with the rapid expansion of the food industry will also support the market development.
Several industry players are engaged in new product development, mergers, and acquisitions to capitalize on growing health and fitness trends. Industry players are investing to gain brand recognition by sourcing local raw material and competing on basis of price, grade, and quality. Furthermore, companies are also engaged in segment diversification by introducing various product lines to cater different end industries which is likely to boost market statistics.
Soluble Fibers Industry Analysis By Application (Functional Foods & Beverages, Animal Feed, Pharmaceuticals), Raw Material (Fruits & Vegetables, Cereals & Grains, Other Plant Parts, Non-Plant Sources), Products (Inulin, Oligosaccharides [FOS, GOS], Resistant Starch, Resistant Maltodextrin, Polydextrose, Beta-Glucan)  Industry Analysis Report, Regional Outlook, Growth Potential, Price Trends, Competitive Market Share & Forecast, 2017 – 2024
Global Market Insights, Inc., headquartered in Delaware, U.S., is a global market research and consulting service provider; offering syndicated and custom research reports along with growth consulting services. Our business intelligence and industry research reports offer clients with penetrative insights and actionable market data specially designed and presented to aid strategic decision making. These exhaustive reports are designed via a proprietary research methodology and are available for key industries such as chemicals, advanced materials, technology, renewable energy and biotechnology.
GMIPulse , our business analytics platform offers an online, interactive option of exploring our proprietary industry research data in an easy-to-use and dynamic manner. Clients get to explore market intelligence across 11 top level categories and hundreds of industry segments within them, covering regional, company level and cross-sectional statistics that make our offering a stand-out for decision makers.
More articles issued by Global Market Insights, Inc
