The corn crop looks set to go from bad to worse, which should boost prices of the grain.
The combination of a weather-related planting delay, lower-than-forecast crop yields, and the probability of fall frost could conspire to produce double-digit gains in futures prices.
“I think we could see a rally to new highs by the end of the year,” says Shawn Hackett, president of Boca Raton, Fla.–based Hackett Financial Advisors.
Corn futures prices could reach $5 a bushel by year end, or about 12% higher than their recent $4.1175, Hackett says. But they may go even higher.
“With a legitimate frost, which would really clip the crop, we’d have to be looking at corn in the sixes,” he says, meaning greater than $6 a bushel.
Investors who want to profit from the probable move should buy December-dated corn futures contracts on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Alternatively, try the Teucrium Corn exchange-traded fund (ticker: CORN), which tracks the price of corn futures.
The potential harvest already looks like a mess. Planting was delayed by epic wetness in key growing areas this spring. Some farmers didn’t plant, which means the crop will be relatively low. The U.S. is forecast to produce 352 million metric tons of corn this year, down from 366 million last year, according to estimates from the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
However, that may overstate the actual harvest. Earlier this year, traders and others highly criticized this year’s crop survey. As a result, the USDA is resurveying the fields and will release a new report on Aug. 12.
“I think we will find that the acres planted and the yields will be less than people think,” Hackett says. That means the results should show fewer acres planted with less corn per acre growing on each field.
But that’s only the beginning. The late planting means the crop’s maturity is far behind its usual growing schedule. By now, almost all of the corn has started its silking stage. Silk-like strands grow behind the husk and on top of the corn kernels. Yet on Aug. 4, only 78% of the planted crop had reached the silking stage, versus 95% on the same date a year ago, according to USDA data.
After silking, it takes an average of about 60 more days for the crop to reach maturity. It can take longer if the weather is cooler, Hackett says. But immature plants are susceptible to frost damage.
“The crop has to grow and mature to get to the point where it isn’t affected by cold,” says Joe D’Aleo, a meteorologist for agriculture at New York–based WeatherBell Analytics.
This weekly email offers a full list of stories and other features in this week's magazine. Saturday mornings ET.
This year is more likely than usual to bring a cold snap in the fall. That’s because of a curious combination of meteorologically related events. First, the number of spots appearing on the sun’s surface is nearing its cycle lows, which tends to coincide with colder weather. Also, the hot, wet El Niño weather is morphing into a cooler, dryer system, according to a Hackett report.
Any actual frost damage or even a scare would cause “complete chaos in the grain markets and set off what could be a legendary weather market spike trade higher,” according to a Hackett report.
Trading commodities is replete with risk, and more so when it involves weather forecasting . Better-than-expected weather or a larger-than-forecast crop could send futures prices tumbling.
On balance, though, the upside would seem to favor buying corn futures.
The corn crop looks set to go from bad to worse, which should boost prices of the grain.
