The most active corn futures on the Chicago Board Of Trade were up 1.2 per cent at $3.52 a bushel.
The most active soybean futures were up 0.5 per cent at $8.92 a bushel, near the session high of $8.93 a bushel - the highest since March 6. Soybeans firmed 0.3 per cent on Tuesday.
SYDNEY: US corn futures rose more than 1 per cent on Wednesday as expectations of stronger demand for ethanol were spurred by higher oil prices, though the global coronavirus pandemic provided a ceiling to gains.
The most active corn futures on the Chicago Board Of Trade were up 1.2 per cent at $3.52 a bushel by 0120 GMT, having gained more than 1 per cent in the previous session.
The most active soybean futures were up 0.5 per cent at $8.92 a bushel, near the session high of $8.93 a bushel - the highest since March 6. Soybeans firmed 0.3 per cent on Tuesday.
The most active wheat futures were down 0.2 per cent to $5.60-1/4 a bushel, having closed down 0.2 per cent on Tuesday.
The US Department of Agriculture's crop reports showed improving winter wheat ratings in the US Plains, bolstering yield prospects.
Corn had been under sustained pressure this week after a slump in oil prices depressed demand for ethanol.
US ethanol producers are on track to shut about 2 billion gallons of annualized output by the end of this week because of a slump in demand for fuel, the head of the Renewable Fuels Association trade group said on Monday.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
