Corn rebounds from 2016 low, virus worries cap gains
Analysts said corn was drawing support from stronger oil prices.
Prices of corn, however, were capped by worries about the impact of the coronavirus pandemic that has caused widespread shutdowns.
SYDNEY: US corn futures rose nearly 1 per cent on Thursday, rebounding from a three-year low hit in the previous session, as a surge in oil prices raised hopes for an uptick in demand for oil-substitute ethanol.
Prices of corn, however, were capped by worries about the impact of the coronavirus pandemic that has caused widespread shutdowns.
Wheat rose more than 0.5 per cent on expectations for stronger demand for stables such as pasta, while soybeans were on course to extend gains into a third consecutive session.
The most active corn futures on the Chicago Board Of Trade were up 0.7 per cent at $3.37-3/4 a bushel by 0309 GMT, having slumped 2.5 per cent on Wednesday when prices fell to the September 2016 low of $3.32 a bushel.
Analysts said corn was drawing support from stronger oil prices.
Oil prices surged as much as nearly 20 per cent on Thursday, bouncing back from days of heavy losses in a relief rally, yet proved short-lived as gains eased throughout the day.
"The oil price, and so US ethanol use, issue continues," said Tobin Gorey, director of agricultural strategy at Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
The ethanol market, which accounts for about 39 per cent of US corn usage, has been volatile amid the spread of the coronavirus pandemic.
The rise in prices on Thursday came as a growing number of central banks vowed stimulus efforts.
The European Central Bank on Wednesday pledged to buy 750 billion euro ($820 billion) in bonds through 2020.
The most active soybean futures were up 0.2 per cent at $8.27-1/4 a bushel, having firmed 0.2 per cent on Wednesday.
The most active wheat futures were up 0.5 per cent at $5.11 a bushel, having closed 1.8 per cent higher in the previous session.
Analysts said wheat was drawing support from increased demand for food as people bulk buy due to expectations of shortages amid the coronavirus outbreak.
US Agriculture Department on Monday said good-to-excellent ratings for the Kansas wheat crop fell 1 percentage point to 46 per cent.
