Corn Futures have been trade lower for the last couple of months so today we would take a look at how we called the decline in Corn Futures based on the initial decline from June 2019 being in 5 waves and incomplete sequence from October 2019 peak. Let’s take a look at the daily chart from beginning of March.
Chart below shows initial decline from 465’5 peak was in 5 waves which we labelled as wave ((A)) or could have been wave ((1)) and bounce to 402’4 completed wave ((B)) or could have been wave ((2)). This was followed by a decline to 362’2 that we labelled as wave (1) and bounce to 394’0 was labelled as wave (2). After this, Corn Futures broke below 362’2 low and rallied sharply and though at one stage it did look like they could do a FLAT in wave (2) but the rally from 361’6 was left in 3 waves and moment cycle from 361’6 low ended, we started calling the decline in wave 3 of (3) down from wave ((B)) or ((2)) peak.
Chart below shows, decline extended as expected, we have already seen a break of wave ((1)) low that we were previously labelling as wave ((A)) and we are still within wave 3 of (3) which means cycle from 403’4 peak is incomplete and we should see more downside. Bounces are expected to fail in 3, 7 or 11 swings for extension lower to complete 5 waves decline from 403’4 peak.
Break of September 2019 low creates an incomplete bearish sequence against October 2019 peak and now the bounces are expected to fail in 3, 7 or 11 swings for more downside toward 290’2 – 263’6 area at least where we can expect a cycle from 10.2019 peak to end. If 263’6 level is exceeded, then next level of interest would be 161.8% Fibonacci extension at 220’6.
FURTHER DISCLOSURES AND DISCLAIMER CONCERNING RISK, RESPONSIBILITY
Trading in the Foreign Exchange market is a challenging opportunity where above average returns are available for educated and experienced investors who are willing to take above average risk.
However, before deciding to participate in Foreign Exchange (FX) trading, you should carefully consider your investment objectives, level of  xperience and risk appetite. Do not invest or trade capital you cannot afford to lose. EME PROCESSING AND CONSULTING, LLC, THEIR REPRESENTATIVES, AND ANYONE WORKING FOR OR WITHIN WWW.ELLIOTTWAVE- FORECAST.COM is not responsible for any loss from any form of distributed advice, signal,
Again, we fully DISCLOSE to the Subscriber base that the Service as a whole, the individual Parties, Representatives, or owners shall not be liable to any and all Subscribers for any losses or damages as a result of any action taken by the Subscriber from any trade idea or signal posted on
the website(s) distributed through any form of social-media, email, the website, and/or any other electronic, written, verbal, or future form of communication . All analysis, trading signals, trading recommendations, all charts, communicated interpretations of the wave counts, and all content from any media form produced by www.Elliottwave-forecast.com and/or the Representatives are solely the opinions and best efforts of the respective author(s).
In general Forex instruments are highly leveraged, and traders can lose some or all of their initial margin funds. All content provided by www.Elliottwave-forecast.com is expressed in good faith and is intended to help Subscribers succeed in the marketplace, but it is never guaranteed. There is no “holy grail” to trading or forecasting the market and we are wrong sometimes like everyone else.
Please understand and accept the risk involved when making any trading and/or investment decision.
UNDERSTAND that all the content we provide is protected through copyright of EME PROCESSING AND CONSULTING, LLC. It is illegal to disseminate in any form of communication any part or all of our proprietary information without specific authorization.
UNDERSTAND that you also agree to not allow persons that are not PAID SUBSCRIBERS to view any of the content not released publicly. IF YOU ARE FOUND TO BE IN VIOLATION OF THESE RESTRICTIONS you or your firm (as the Subscriber) will be charged fully with no discount for one year  subscription to our Premium Plus Plan at $1,799.88 for EACH person or firm
who received any of our content illegally through the respected intermediary’s (Subscriber in violation of terms) channel(s) of communication.
