Corn, wheat futures climb to multimonth highs as U.S. planting has slowed
Corn futures finished Monday at their highest level in nearly a year, while wheat futures marked a three-month peak as wet weather raised concerns over U.S. planting progress for the crops.
Grain futures markets gave “[exploded] higher as of late based off late planting figures,” said Jason Rotman, president of Lido Isle Advisors. The futures and options brokerage executive said fewer crops have been planted than usual, “and wheat and corn are exploding higher.”
“The market is very short these markets so don’t be surprised to see continued rallies in wheat and corn,” he said, adding that “there is still a big surplus of soybeans.”
On Monday, the most-active July futures contract for corn US:CN19 added 5 ¾ cents, or 1.5%, to settle at $3.89 a bushel in Chicago. The settlement was the highest since early June 2018, according to FactSet data. July wheat US:WN19 added 13 ¼ cents, or 2.9%, to finish at $4.78 ¼ a bushel, with prices posting the highest finish since February.
“Too much rain in all the wrong places, both over the weekend and in the current forecasts, have traders concerned about late planting for corn and potentially poor wheat quality,” said Sal Gilbertie, president and chief investment officer at Teucrium Trading, a sponsor for exchange-traded agricultural funds. “Many believe the latest U.S. government-issued [World Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates] report may have overestimated both acres planted and yields based upon current weather patterns.”
Meanwhile, the rise in soybean futures lagged behind that of corn and wheat, with July soybeans US:SN19 up 10 cents, or 1.2%, at $8.31 ¾ a bushel. Prices had settled at $8.02 ½ on May 13, the lowest since December 2008.
“Too much rain across major growing regions has hampered farmers ability to get corn into the ground in time for this planting season, and thus, beans are the most likely choice” for a farmer who’s behind on planting,” said Daniel Hussey, market strategist at Zaner Financial Services. “This favors farmers producing more soybeans than originally anticipated, while simultaneously reducing their corn production.”
Corn futures are also “seeing the effects of a short covering rally caused by the noncommercial (speculative) positions being bought back,” said Hussey. “The cumulative speculative short position got to its largest ever, and now that the market is shifting the economic condition for corn, speculators have been seen covering their shorts for the second week in a row.”
“When you compare this to the soybean positioning, which only just this last week hit its record short noncommercial position and continued to rise, the market is re-pricing both commodities due to the potential acreage shifts,” he explained.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Crop Progress report released Monday, covering the week ended May 19, showed that corn in 18 states stood at 49% planted, versus the 2014 to 2018 average of 80%. Spring wheat planted in six states stood at 70%, down from the five-year average of 80%.
In a year where a classic 60/40 allocation has showed its value, JP Morgan is joining the line of Wall Street banks that are calling the demise of the traditional portfolio.
