Before he was Cole the Cornstar, he was Cole the University of Northern Iowa student.
Cole, who declined to share his last name out of privacy concerns, grew up on a farm and has helped his family manage close to 1,200 acres for several years. In 2018, he decided to start the now-popular YouTube channel "Cole the Cornstar" to give people a front-row seat to farm life.
He said he had the idea to start the channel when he was a kid, but didn't think anyone would be interested in the daily challenges of farming.
"Then I got into college and a lot of people were asking me, like, what we did during the wintertime," he said. "I just figured if someone lives in Iowa and they don’t know what goes on at a farm, how is the rest of the world supposed to know?"
The 22-year-old finance major propelled himself to internet corn-stardom with a YouTube channel that follows his life on his family's farm 20 minutes east of Marshalltown. His channel, which he began in October 2018, has more than 200,000 subscribers and consistently garners more than 100,000 views for each video he posts, some reaching upward of 1 million.
"My goal in the first year of running the channel was I wanted to have a thousand subscribers," he said. "After six months I had 300 subscribers, and then I went from 300 to 10,000 in two weeks."
Cole said a video entitled "Convincing The Bank To Lend Me $1,000,000" from January 2019 started the channel's growth skyrocketing, getting more than 475,000 views. Now he has several sponsors, including sunglasses company Pit Viper, whose products he wears in almost every video.
Cole said he records everything he does on the farm over a day or two, editing the events down into 10- to 20-minute logs of a hard day's work. He learned how to edit videos on YouTube.
"When everyone drives by on the road and they see the tractors on the field during the springtime and they may see a sprayer out during the summer ... people assume that’s the only time we work," he said. "But there’s so much more that goes on behind the scenes the rest of the year."
Cole, who is a fourth-generation farmer, said he aims to reach anyone who wants to learn more about agriculture with his family-friendly videos. He also enjoys the process because it gives him a chance to document the farm and look back at all the changes that can happen in a year or two.
Though Cole is the main character in his videos, his brother, Cooper, and his father, Dale, who goes by Daddy Cornstar, feature prominently. Cole began the channel shortly before his grandfather died, and said the videos have helped his father fill the void.
"My grandpa was my dad’s best friend," Cole said. "My dad was pretty lost on the farm. He didn’t have a drive for anything — he lost his best friend. So when the channel started taking off a little bit, that really filled dad’s void that he was missing and it gave him something to look forward to."
Dale said that when his son brought up making the videos, he didn't know what YouTube was and didn't think anyone would watch them. Cole had to replace his dad's flip phone with a smartphone so Dale could watch the videos in the field.
Dale said the success has been welcome and exciting.
"It just tickles the heck out of us to be honest," Dale said.
He reads all the comments on the videos and said he can see how they have opened the eyes of hundreds of thousands of people to what being a farmer is like. He said he's proud of Cole for his work on the videos.
"For a dad to be able to be on a farm and have your kids there with you and know what you’re doing and take pride in it and keep it going, it makes you feel pretty proud as a parent," he said.
