It’s an agricultural paradox that terrible weather can be good for farming-linked stocks. That’s the case, however, because delayed planting and poor crop yields push up food commodity prices—creating more demand for crop inputs in years to come. After all the stock market is forward looking.
“We believe the negative weather impact could turn favorably in 2020,” wrote RBC analyst Arun Viswanathan in a Friday research report. “Given the approximately 14% lower 2019/2020 projected year over year ending [grain] stocks, ag-fundamentals could improve in 2020.”
Viswanathan upgraded Corteva shares (ticker: CTVA) to Buy from Hold and raised his price target to $38 a share from $29, about 20% above recent levels. What's more, he upgraded shares of Corteva peer FMC (FMC) to Buy from Hold and raised his price target to $103 a share from $87, about 16% above recent levels.
The back story. Corteva is the agricultural business of the former DowDuPont which includes legacy-Dow’s farming chemicals business and legacy-DuPont’s Pioneer seed division.
Corteva shares traded weakly out of the gate, rising only about 1.7% before the company reported earnings in August compared with the 5% gain of the Dow Jones Industrial Average over the same span.
The stock, however, jumped 6% after the company reported second- quarter numbers even after management adjusted earnings guidance lower. Investors were expecting even worse declines. The company now expects to generate about $2 billion in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, or Ebitda, this year compared with prior guidance of about $2.2 billion.
What’s new. Viswanathan had Corteva stock at a Neutral rating in June, but then the weather turned.
“Given the wet planting season, weather challenges have delayed farmers from planting seeds on the ground this year,” explained the analyst in his report. U.S. planting season starts in April and continues through June and this year only 83% of corn seed was planted. Usually all the planned corn acres get planted. “We believe these conditions will now turn to tailwinds for 2020 as volume growth returns for next year planting season.”
Looking ahead. Corteva has new products in its development pipeline as well as profit improvements implemented as a newly stand-alone company. (The DowDuPont separation was official on June 1.) Those are both additional sources of stock upside as long as management can meet their goals.
The China-U.S. trade war, however, is a watch item for investors. The U.S. exports a lot of agricultural products around the globe and China is a large importer of grains and soybeans. The continuing battle shifts export volumes around—people still have to eat—but, at the margin, the conflict hurts U.S. farmers.
Barron’s recently wrote positively about FMC (FMC) saying it was a less complicated story than newly spun out Corteva. But we also said there was value in Corteva stock, especially after early stock declines. We still feel that way. Agriculture isn’t often correlated with the broader economy—the weather doesn’t care about Fed interest rate decisions. Investors looking to diversify can add farming exposure and avoid some of the macroeconomic drama unfolding.
It’s an agricultural paradox that terrible weather can be good for farming-linked stocks.
