Corteva Lost Money Last Quarter. Wall Street Doesn’t Care.
Agricultural giant Corteva reported earnings that just beat Wall Street’s expectations. The producer of seeds and crop chemicals lost 6 cents a share for the quarter ended in December, while analysts were looking for a 7-cent loss .
“Our results show that we capitalized on the strength of our product pipeline to realize above market organic growth especially outside of North America,” said CEO James Collins in the company’s news release. “As we look forward, we expect more normal weather conditions in North America will set the stage for further performance improvements.”
Losses in the December quarter aren’t a surprise. Farming is seasonal . The biggest quarters for Corteva (ticker: CTVA) come in the first half of the year, when North American farmers are planting and maintaining their crops.
Corteva, of course, is a global business, generating about $3 billion in sales in Latin America. (Brazil, along with the U.S., is a dominant global exporter of food.)
Brazil is in its safrinha season. That is the second planting that follows, for the most part, the soybean crop. And it’s typically corn that gets planted in the second season. Strong safrinha seasons are good for Corteva because the company, at the margin, would prefer to sell corn seed. Corn products tend to be higher value, with more traits—like best resistance—embedded in the seeds.
Looking ahead, the company expects to earn about $1.50 in 2020. Analyst were modeling $1.48 a share. Corteva targets 4% to 6% sales growth each year. But growth depends on the weather , making it hard to predict a full year in January.
The company also announced it was ramping up the rollout of its Enlist herbicide. That is another positive for the company. Faster than expected Enlist growth means the company will have to pay less to third parties for licensing Roundup Ready soybean traits.
Roundup Ready products, brought to market by Monsanto in the 1990s, were one of the original genetically modified seed and herbicide combinations—a type of bean that is resistant to the farm chemical Roundup.
The news didn’t move Corteva stock in premarket trading.
      Shares, however, are up about 12% from lows just after the spinoff.
Spun-off stocks often trade down initially as investors decide whether they want to hold the stand-alone companies for the long term.
Corteva Lost Money Last Quarter. Wall Street Doesn’t Care.
Agricultural giant Corteva reported earnings that just beat Wall Street’s expectations.
