By Alexander Lopez July 2, 2020, 2:16 pm
SUPPORT TO CORN FARMERS. Department of Agriculture-Caraga Region Executive Director Abel James I. Monteagudo (right), together with DA-13 Corn Program Coordinator Melody Guimary (2nd from right) and Butuan City Agriculture Office chief Pierre Anthony Joven (left), turns over corn seeds and fertilizers on Wednesday (July 1, 2020) to Mandamo Integrated Farmers Association of Butuan City. The farmers' group is one of the three livelihood organizations that are recipients of the PHP5 million financial support through the agency’s corn clustering approach and development of corn model farms. (Photo courtesy of DA-13 Information Office)
BUTUAN CITY – The Department of Agriculture in the Caraga Region (DA-13) launched its 2020 corn model farm program in support of the “Plant, Plant, Plant, Program” (Agri4Ps) of the agency Wednesday.
DA-13 Executive Director Abel James I. Monteagudo said the corn model farm program is incorporated in the clustering approach strategy of DA-13 in the corn industry in the region, which aims to strengthen services of the agency to the corn farmers in the region.
Monteagudo said the program also aims to ensure increased farm productivity and the establishment of linkages to markets for clustered farmers’ organizations that are considered cluster-cooperators.
On Wednesday, Monteagudo, together with DA-13 Corn Program Coordinator Melody Guimary, turned over PHP5 million worth of corn seeds and fertilizers to Mandamo Integrated Farmers Association of Butuan City and the Bunawan Agusan del Sur Corn Farmers Association.
The two farmers’ groups are the first cluster-cooperators that will engage in the development of their model farms consisting of 50 hectares each in their respective areas.
“Aside from strengthening support to our corn farmers in the region, the clustering approach will also ensure food security in the area,” Monteagudo said in a statement Thursday.
He said DA-13 is also set to deliver corn seeds and fertilizers to a cluster site in the town of San Miguel, Surigao del Sur with a total area of 50 hectares.
In an earlier statement sent to Philippine News Agency, Guimary said Caraga Region has an existing 18 corn clusters situated in different provinces covering around 6,326 hectares and involving 3,622 corn farmers.
DA-13 is currently evaluating 9 other areas that applied for clustering with total coverage of 2,759 hectares and 1,280 corn farmers.
Local government units (LGUs) in the region are also proposing additional 10 areas to be clustered this year with a total area of 2,249 hectares with 1,438 corn farmers.
“If all areas will be finally classified as clusters, Caraga Region will have a total of 37 corn clusters with 6,340 farmers and a total area of 11,334 hectares,” Guimary said.
Aside from the provision of seeds and fertilizers, Guimary said that DA-13 is now working for additional interventions to the different corn clusters in the region, including the provision of farm tractors, harvesters, dryers, and training on updated technologies on corn farming.
“Organized farmers in our clusters can also easily access loan support from the government or private financial institutions,” Guimary said. (PNA)
