There is a lot more going on at Deere than building green-and-yellow farm equipment.
Farm-implement maker Deere & Co. has a quarter-trillion-dollar opportunity selling new technology and services to farmers, according to Melius Research analyst Rob Wertheimer. He is talking about opportunities above and beyond money earned selling the iconic green tractors the company is known for.
That $250 billion is the total available market for technologies that improve farmers’ crop yield while saving them money on pesticides, herbicides, fertilizer and seeds.
“Deere can save 90% of herbicide costs in some applications—and large environmental benefits follow as well,” Wertheimer says in a recent research report. Reduced weedkiller application is one example of potential savings from targeting chemical applications. “Many of us [analysts] are thinking about important, but small stuff [such as] current, product launches, and how they could help Deere raise up its margins by maybe [4%]…” whereas, “cost savings and yield enhancements brought by Deere technologies could add up to hundreds of billions.”
It is a big number, and Wertheimer knows it isn’t without controversy. Many of the products he envisions—and that Deere is investigating—aren’t available commercially yet. But the potential remains.
Consider that the average acre of corn planted in the U.S. yields more than 170 bushels. A bushel—an old measure of weight—is 56 pounds of corn kernels. That means corn planted on an acre—the standard U.S. measure of farming area that is a chain times a furlong, two other old measures—generates almost 5 tons of food.
That is impressive, but there are more-impressive feats of corn.
The top of the range—the best farmers can do—is more than 600 bushels an acre. One farmer grew 616 bushels of corn on an irrigated acre with Corteva (CTVA) seed in the national corn-growing contest.
Yes, there is such a contest.
The farmers competing—some of whom call themselves corn warriors—are spending a lot of time and money ensuring the health of each corn plant. Nothing is too small to measure. It might not be practical or cost-effective to adopt all the techniques used to generate incredible crop yields en masse. But the yields they achieve demonstrate the upper fertility limit of American cropland.
Every detail matters. Farmers, for instance, will measure the depth of seed planting and the spacing of seed planting. Seed selected for planting are tailored for the geography. And soil tests will measure nutrient levels on each acre. Plant health is checked.
Farming is a high-tech business. Technology exists to vary the rate of fertilizer application based on soil tests. Deere is even testing field cameras that can measure plant health and see plant chlorophyll. And tractors can drive themselves.
Deere stock doesn’t trade on the potential envisioned by Wertheimer. It mainly trades on the weather—or the supply and demand of corn around the globe. Last year, the weather was strange, with a wet spring delaying planting, but crop yields turned out OK.
Deere shares had an OK year, too, rising about 12%. Not bad, but that lagged behind comparable gains of the S&P 500 .
Still, Wall Street likes the stock. About 60% of analysts rate shares the equivalent of Buy, about 5 percentage points better than the average buy-rating ratio of stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average .
Deere stock trades for about 18 times estimated calendar-year 2020 earnings, a small premium to other industrial and machinery stocks in the S&P 500.
Sign up to Review & Preview , a daily email from Barron’s. Every evening we’ll review the news that moved markets during the day and look ahead to what it means for your portfolio in the morning.
Farm-implement maker Deere & Co.
