Deere Stock Is Rising After Disappointing Earnings. Here’s Why.
Updated Aug. 16, 2019 12:02 pm ET / Original Aug. 16, 2019 9:00 am ET
Deere ’s fiscal third quarter earnings missed Wall Street predictions—and the market couldn’t care less.
Deere (ticker: DE) reported $2.81 in earnings per share, excluding certain tax adjustments, while analysts expected $2.84 per share . It also cut its fiscal full-year guidance for the second time in two quarters . The stock, however, was already down 4% year to date entering Friday after dropping more than 7% this week. So it isn’t a big surprise share rose in midday trading, by more than $4 or almost 3%, better than the 1% gain of the Dow Jones Industrial Average .
With the 2019 U.S. crop about to be harvested, investors attention turns to 2020 and if farmers will spend on equipment even as commodity prices slide.
The back story. Poor weather has impacted U.S. farm income and, by extension, Deere’s agricultural equipment business. Poor growing conditions can often carry a silver lining for farmers—they push up commodity prices leading to better demand in the future. But investors got a surprise on Monday from the USDA when the agency increased its estimated U.S. crop size , despite the continuing weather problems. That sent corn prices, and shares of agricultural input providers such as Deere, much lower for the week.
What’s new. Deere cut fiscal full-year net income guidance by about $100 million, from $3.3 billion to $3.2 billion. Agricultural sales guidance was unchanged, but construction sales growth guidance was trimmed, from 11% to 10%. That level of growth is stronger than most other industrial end markets. Still, investors won’t like to see a new end market with decelerating growth.
Management, however, didn’t appear all that concerned about construction.
“John Deere’s third-quarter results reflected the high degree of uncertainty that continues to overshadow the agricultural sector,” CEO Samuel Allen said in a statement. “Concerns about export-market access, near-term demand for commodities such as soybeans, and overall crop conditions, have caused many farmers to postpone major equipment purchases.”
Looking ahead. For Allen, the biggest concern appears to be trade. The U.S.-China trade war continues to affect the U.S. farming sector. The U.S. is a large exporter of food products and China is a large importer of food products. Targeting U.S. farm exports is one tool Chinese officials have to fight back against the Trump administration’s tariffs.
In addition to tariffs, management address commodity prices, equipment pricing, government stabilization payments—given to farmers to offset trade war impacts—as well as farmer forward selling practices. “We’ll wait to see what it means for equipment demand given the uncertain conditions we have,” said Deere management on their earnings conference call.
And that uncertainty will likely keep shares range bound until some of those risk factors fade. Deere stock trades for about 13 times estimated next years earnings, a discount to historical average and other industrial companies in the S&P 500.
This story was update after the company’s conference call.
Deere Stock Is Rising After Disappointing Earnings. Here’s Why.
Deere’s fiscal third quarter earnings missed Wall Street predictions—and the market couldn’t care less.
