Deere is looking to technology to help future growth.
Iconic American farm implement maker Deere has had quite the year . Swings in crop prices, a trade war, and unexpected weather trends have left investors unsure of how to play the stock.
Instead of focusing on long-term trends in the business, shareholders have felt the need to watch the skies and predict the weather . Deere, however, is much more than the rainfall in Iowa each May or field moisture in September. It’s a company with employees, senior management and—most important—a good strategy.
The business's strategic nature and growing focus on technology have allowed Deere stock (ticker: DE) to rise about 100% over the past 5 years, to more than $170 a share from less than $90.
Corn prices—the underlying commodity driving much of U.S. farm activity—have gone nowhere over the same span. If only crop prices had simply stayed flat, then farmers might feel better. But corn’s rollercoaster path to nowhere this year likely induced nausea for some.
Bad weather in the spring and autumn, for instance, whipsawed commodity traders in 2019. At different points this year, corn prices were up more than 30% then down more than 20% from its yearly highs. That volatility can paralyze farmers and delay equipment purchases. Crop prices determine—to a large extent—farm income. It’s hard to buy a $500,000 piece of equipment without having some income certainty.
Trade is another reason farmers are more cautious recently. Historically, China is a large importer of U.S. agricultural output, and crops have been weaponized in the continuing trade war.
Through it all, the stock has done OK in 2019. Deere shares are up about 18% year to date, only a little worse than the comparable 19% gain of the Dow Jones Industrial Average over the same span. In addition, earnings are expected to grow in 2019 and 2020 despite the business volatility. Stock gains are partly because farmers have to replace old equipment, regardless of the weather. But the company’s strategy also plays a big part.
“Deere’s move to embrace technology is part of a broader shift at the company, which will bring cost savings in addition to margin enhancing products,” wrote Melius analyst Rob Wertheimer in a Monday research report. The technology embrace is an “important strategic shift.” In the past, Deere was focused on big sales increases by going into new, global farming markets. Now Deere wants to use technology to drive crop-yield enhancement for its farmer customers. “That’s the right strategy for both the company and the world,” he adds.
Wertheimer rates Deere shares the equivalent of Buy and has a $233 price target for shares, about 33% higher than recent levels. Yes, he qualifies as a Deere bull, but the technology embrace makes sense. Farmers will pay up for yield and are quick to embrace technology that delivers results.
“Farmers have adopted to semiautonomous equipment that creates a more efficient machine,” International Agribusiness Group consultant Mark Feight tells Barron’s. “It’s much easier to run autonomous equipment in a field where traffic is quite low versus navigating a busy highway.” He says technology helps farmers precisely place seeds and fertilizer fields at variable rates. Both enhancements improve output and cut costs.
Farmers, of course, aren’t new to technology . “GPS-driven data collection on many levels of each acre has gone on for decades,” adds Feight. “We are just beginning to develop algorithms to understand and harvest usable data.”
Investors will hear more about strategy on Deere’s coming earnings call. The company’s fiscal year ended in October and, Deere reports numbers on Wednesday November 27, just before Thanksgiving. (After the U.S. harvest is in.)
Wall Street expects the company to report $2.14 in per share earnings from $8.5 billion in sales for its fiscal fourth quarter. The backward-looking earnings figures won’t be as important as any forward guidance offered by management.
“[Guidance is] likely below current consensus,” writes Baird analyst Mig Dobre in a Wednesday research report. “Street models 2% revenue growth and 11% [per-share earnings] growth. Given ongoing [inventory] destocking we suspect [the company] could take a more conservative route.” Even though he is warning about a potential disappointment, Dobre rates shares the equivalent of Buy and has a $176 price target for the stock.
Valuation is another reason both analysts might like Deere stock. Shares trade for 15.1 times calendar-year 2020 earnings, a discount to other industrial companies in the S&P 500 .
Deere’s Strategy Matters More Than the Weather. That’s Good for the Stock.
Iconic American farm implement maker Deere has had quite the year.
