Day 4: National Average Corn Yield at 163.2 BPA, Soybeans at 44.2 BPA
Day 4: National Average Corn Yield at 163.2 BPA, Soybeans at 44.2 BPA
Green shading shows higher (dark green) and lower (light green) county yield estimates on Gro Intelligence's real-time yield maps in the 10 states included in this year's digital yield tour. (Photo courtesy of Gro Intelligence)
MOUNT JULIET, Tenn. (DTN) -- Gro Intelligence forecasts a national average corn yield of 163.2 bushels per acre (bpa), 6.3 bpa lower than USDA's August forecast.
On soybeans, the agricultural data firm estimates a national yield average of 44.2 bpa, 4.3 bpa lower than USDA.
Over the course of the past week, DTN has been pairing Gro's real-time yield maps, which are generated with satellite imagery, rainfall data, temperature maps and other public data, with on-the-ground commentary from farmers to conduct the DTN/Progressive Farmer 2019 Digital Yield Tour.
The national yield estimate includes all production in the U.S., not just the 10 states included in this week's tour.
"It's been a difficult growing season from the beginning," Gro Intelligence Senior Vice President of Agribusiness James Heneghan said. "Accounting for yield potential this season is going to be a challenge for anyone, whether they're using a survey or a satellite-based yield model. These are not great yields by the last couple of years' standards, but they're not disaster yields like 2012."
The Gro yield model updates on a daily basis to include the latest satellite and weather data. Heneghan said the corn yield model started out in the mid-170s, then dropped into the 150s before bouncing back above 160 bpa in recent weeks. For comparison, in 2012, U.S. corn yield estimates started off the season in the mid-160s and then the USDA final yield ended at a 123 bpa national average.
"In a year when there are no easy comparisons to previous planting periods and crop conditions, the DTN/Progressive Farmer 2019 Digital Yield Tour, powered by Gro Intelligence, provided a serious and much-needed crop survey for the market to assess in August," DTN Lead Analyst Todd Hultman said. "Friday's national corn yield estimate of 163.2 bpa suggests USDA may find less crops in September when it ventures into actual fields. If nothing else, the states needing clarification have clearly been identified as Missouri, South Dakota and Illinois-through-Ohio."
On soybeans, Hultman said Gro's 44.2 bpa estimate suggests total production will be closer to 3.4 billion bushels.
"If true, this year's soybean crop will be down roughly 1.1 bb from 2018 and offers significant relief to burdensome ending soybean stocks at a time when trade with China is not going well," he said. For more on Hultman's thoughts on the latest USDA report, the digital yield tour and production potential, please read this week's Todd's Take column here: https://www.dtnpf.com/… .
The DTN/Progressive Farmer 2019 Digital Yield Tour took an in-depth look at 10 states: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, Ohio, South Dakota and Wisconsin.
With the exception of Minnesota and Wisconsin, Gro Intelligence's corn yields were all lower than USDA's August estimates. The decline was especially stark in the Eastern Corn Belt, with Gro Intelligence's models forecasting a 27% decline in Illinois yields compared to last year.
"Last year, Illinois really drove the upside in the national totals," Heneghan said. "This year Iowa should be supporting the national estimate."
All of Gro Intelligence's soybean estimates for the 10 states included in the tour were lower than USDA's August forecast.
Here's a summary of the tour's state findings, using Gro Intelligence's yield estimates from our published stories. Because Gro Intelligence's yield models update every day, the numbers on their website may differ from what you see below.
You can find detailed articles on each state at: https://spotlights.dtnpf.com/… .
