NSD means there were no significant differences. There was the one trial in corn for 2019 that showed up as a yield increase with added sulfur.
If you suspect S deficiency do some diagnostic work. It will appear sporadically in the field at first. Pull leaf samples from the “good” and the “bad” areas. Compare those after a lab test.
Or do a strip test on your farm. Before planting, or even shortly after planting, put a strip of sulfur as sulfate — such as gypsum (CaSO4) or ammonium sulfate — across the field. Compare appearance in-season and yield at harvest.
I was looking through the Agronomic Crops Team’s On-Farm research reports ( https://agcrops.osu.edu/on-farm-research ) for some ideas on nitrogen management. And I found that many trials start with 100 or more pounds of nitrogen as the starting point. What about a zero rate in these trials? We (I hope) all know that every year is different especially for nitrogen management, so by using a zero rate as the base we get a feel for what kind of season we had for comparison. In my trials I have made 60 bushels per acre up to 160 bushels per acre in yield with no nitrogen on the same farm but in different years. The year we hit 160 was the year we had a 160-bushel per acre state corn yield average.
I know we need nitrogen to grow corn, and our current recommendation tool relies on economics to set that rate. Our current best guess for a corn N rate is about 175 pounds of N per acre ( http://cnrc.agron.iastate.edu ) on average, in average years. Is this year average? By doing a zero strip in your field you can get an idea of what your field can do to mineralize nitrogen. And until we get those results over several years, it will be difficult to know what to recommend for a variable rate.
The other factor we need is crop removal. Several trials of late in Ohio show we are somewhere between 0.65- and 0.75-pound N removed per bushel of corn. Let’s say 0.7 pound of N per bushel. If you make 100 bushels per acre of corn from your zero N strip then your soil mineralized 70 pounds of N per acre. The 60 to 160 bushels per acre I have had on my trial field made 42 to 112 pounds of N per acre, depending on the year. In the year we made the 42 pounds of N, we needed more nitrogen to maximize our yield and in the year we made 112, we needed less.
The problem is I didn’t know this until the year was over. This is where some of the forecast tools come into play — the satellite services, the soil tests, and the crop sensors. Try one or all and get familiar with them, then start to build your understanding of your farm, nitrogen management and weather impacts. This will save you money and benefit the environment.
