Nitrogen-fixing biological can be tank-mixed with common herbicides.
Corn farmers can apply the nitrogen-fixing bacteria Envita as a foliar application, the company announced May 14.
The use of Envita, which uses bacteria that works from within the plant cell to fix N all season long – when and where the plant needs it most – resulted in a 6-bushel-per-acre increase in corn yields in a 2019 foliar trial.
It had previously been recommended for use in-furrow only. Now, growers can use Envita both in-furrow and in a foliar application, the company recommends.
With a spray window of V1-V6, Envita is ideally sprayed between V2-V3 stages. Registered in 27 states , Envita for foliar use retails at a price of $9.75 an acre. Limited quantities are available for the 2020 growing season and farmers throughout the USA can buy online with direct-to-farm delivery options available. It can be tank-mixed with leading herbicides, including glyphosate and atrazine.
“We tried Envita on corn as part of the foliar trial last year,” says Dane Whitley, grower, Ness City, Kansas. “We really thought we’d see no difference because we had 120 pounds of actual N applied, and very low yields with almost no rain. When we were harvesting we noticed the plants looked healthier in part of the field and had an impressive yield increase despite really terrible conditions.”
A naturally-occurring, food-grade microbe, Envita provides corn and other crops with the ability to fix their own nitrogen from the air and has proven success with farmers throughout the U.S. Corn Belt. Growers can choose to use Envita with their regular fertility program for a yield boost or deliver same yields using less nitrogen. Envita is the only nitrogen-fixing bacteria for corn, soybeans, and other crops that works from within plant cells to fix nitrogen from root to leaf all season long.
“Envita is a revolution in nitrogen fixation,” explains Ray Chyc, CEO, Azotic North America. “Not only can corn and other crops now fix nitrogen all season long, growers now have more options for application methods and timing to suit the conditions on their farms.”
