Ethanol-producer profit margins look poised to move higher.
It may be time for aggressive investors to consider ethanol. Production, inventories and trade policy might align to give the stocks a boost.
Ethanol maker Green Plains (ticker: GPRE) reported earnings Tuesday evening and the stock jumped Wednesday, closing up 11.6% to $14.65 a share. Things are looking up for the confusing, embattled commodity.
“As expected, our third quarter results were attributable to a continued weak ethanol margin environment that began to show improvement in late September,” CEO Todd Becker said in the company’s Tuesday evening news release.
Green Plains lost money in the third quarter. But Becker’s comment about the future boosted shares. Things were better in September. What’s more, Becker said on the company’s Thursday conference call that the industry was exhibiting “production discipline” and product inventories are the lowest in years.
Low production and low inventory is a good setup for higher commodity prices. It sounds as if ethanol-producer profit margins are poised to move higher.
If only it were that simple.
Less-aggressive investors should be warned. Ethanol is confusing and not many people can claim to have traded the sector successfully. Four publicly traded ethanol companies that investors can watch—Green Plains, Pacific Ethanol (PEIX), Andersons (ANDE) and REX American Resources (REX)—are off about 67% from all time highs. The market value of the quartet is less than $2 billion, a fraction of the gasoline-refining industry they sell into. Ethanol-producer stock positions need to be watched carefully.
The confusion comes from all the moving parts that go into the margins. Investors have to track corn prices, gasoline prices and ethanol inventories to get a sense of what companies should be earning.
Corn is the main cost input for U.S.-based ethanol, so corn costs impact profitability. But ethanol prices don’t always track corn prices, because ethanol is sold as a gasoline replacement. There are complicating factors—such as regulation—but low energy prices push down ethanol prices.
And ethanol, of course, is its own commodity. If producers make too much, prices fall. But when inventories are low—as they are now—prices can rise.
All that still isn’t enough to predict ethanol profitability. Sugar matters, too. Brazil produces a lot of ethanol—just like the U.S.—and its industry is based on sugar. Low-price ethanol made from low-priced sugar can impact U.S. producer profits.
The refining industry has historically hated the ethanol industry. Ethanol demand was created—in large part—by the U.S. government. First it was to replace the fuel additive MTBE, which was linked to water pollution. Later, George W. Bush-era federal renewable fuels standards sought to wean America off foreign oil by putting corn in the gas tank. Refiners don’t want to buy ethanol from third-party producers if they don’t have to. That also can make life difficult for the publicly traded ethanol companies.
“Things are looking better for ethanol these days,” IAG agricultural consultant Mark Feight said. He noted the low inventories and said trade detente with China could boost U.S. ethanol exports, further tightening domestic supply and demand. “Then what the industry needs is sugar prices to rise to 15 cents, then the industry could do really well.”
Global sugar prices are about 12.5 cents a pound. Why are sugar prices too low Barron’s asked? “There’s too much of it,” Feight responded. It’s a perfect answer coming from a commodity trader. Big supply drives down prices.
There is a lot to consider. But if Becker is right and low inventories lead to better profits, ethanol stock prices should move higher.
      Green Plains shares remain down about 50% from 2016, when the ethanol margin proxy was higher.
Ethanol Is Looking Better. Investors Still Need to Tread Carefully.
It may be time for aggressive investors to consider ethanol.
