Ever wondered how a bear makes a den in a cornfield? Warren reader shares photos of just such a 'nest'
Danny Omdahl of Warren, Minn., shared some photos Wednesday of one of the “nests” a bear made in standing corn on land his family rents out in Marshall County.
Mar 18th 2020 - 3pm.
Danny Omdahl of Warren, Minn., shared this photo of a bear's "den" near Warren that basically was a hollowed-out nest of corn stalks. The bear ran off a couple of weeks ago as the field was being harvested. Reports of such dens have been more frequent than usual because of extreme wet conditions last fall that left thousands of acres of standing corn across the region.  Piles of scat outside the den attest to the bear's hygiene. (Photo courtesy of Danny Omdahl)
Bears have been in the news this week in northwest Minnesota, where the Department of Natural Resources rescued two cubs after their mother was hit by a combine harvesting corn in Marshall County near Strandquist, Minn., about 60 miles northeast of Grand Forks.
The sow bear had carved out a den -- basically a nest -- in the corn after last fall’s extremely wet conditions prevented the crop from being harvested.
As farmers scramble to harvest standing corn before the ground thaws, there have been multiple reports of bear encounters and sightings in corn fields. Jeremy Woinarowicz, a DNR conservation officer working out of the Thief River Falls station, said Monday he’s heard of three such encounters, including the incident in which the mother bear died after being hit by the combine.
Danny Omdahl of Warren, Minn., shared some photos Wednesday of one of the “nests” a bear made in standing corn on land his family rents out in Marshall County and shared this story:
“A couple weeks ago, our renter was combining corn at our farm and they saw a bear get up and run,” Omdahl writes. “When they harvested to the location, they found a nest the bear made for himself. It dug into the ground about 6 to 10 inches and then lined the bottom with corn stalks. Then it gathered enough stalks to encircle the dug out area. I think it built the edges up around 28 inches, too. It’s the first time I’ve seen that.”
As the photos show, bears don’t need much of a den to hibernate.
Dokken reports on outdoors. Call him at (701) 780-1148, (800) 477-6572 ext. 1148 or send email to bdokken@gfherald.com .
