CF Industries and Nutrien stock could benefit from an agricultural rebound.
U.S. farmers have been producing less corn this year, weighing on some fertilizer stocks. But one analyst expects a rebound next year, and sees some companies benefiting.
Bank of America Merrill Lynch analyst Steve Byrne upgraded CF Industries Holding (ticker: CF) and Nutrien (NTR) to Buy from Neutral on Monday, noting that both stocks could benefit from an agricultural rebound . Byrne raised the target price on CF to $56 from $52, but  trimmed Nutrien’s target price to $54 from $55.
Byrne also rates fertilizer company Mosaic (MOS) at Buy, but trimmed the target price to $24 from $26.
The analyst trimmed the target prices of Nutrien and Mosaic stock based on potash prices.
Nutrien stock was up 1.1% and CF Industries was up 2.7% in Monday afternoon trading.
“After a year of markedly lower fertilizer prices, we believe fertilizer shares reflect particularly attractive buying opportunities given our expectation for a price inflection by Spring in all three major nutrients,” Byrne wrote. “Phosphate and potash inventories remain high, but strong demand in North America, Brazil, and India should facilitate quick drawdowns and increased purchasing.”
Nitrogen, meanwhile, could benefit from a corn rebound. Corn production is expected to fall to 13.7 million bushels this year, down from 15.1 million bushels in 2016, as wet weather during the planting season caused farmers to plant less corn .
But next year could be a different story, and companies that sell nitrogen and other fertilizers could benefit, Byrne argues.
The “shortage in 2019 U.S. corn production should boost 4Q19 and early 2020 nitrogen prices and volumes, which we expect to help accelerate earnings through 2020,” he wrote. “Longer term, we believe that technological and industry developments will continue to put pressure on nitrogen prices, though CF’s low-cost position should allow it to benefit in the medium term.”
Nutrien is also in a good position, he wrote.
“We view the company as a defensive investment as it is a bellwether Ag stock, given an increasingly uncertain global industrial outlook that has no impact on the Ag economy,” he wrote. “The company’s nitrogen and potash businesses are at the low end of the global cost curve, and well positioned for future growth.”
