Updated June 17, 2019 1:23 pm ET / Original June 17, 2019 10:47 am ET
Midwestern flooding and persistent rain has made for a rough year for agricultural firms like Deere and Corteva. But the bad weather, ironically, is sowing the seeds for future gains in the agriculture sector.
Excessive rain has led to poor planting conditions this year, hitting productivity and in turn raising concerns about grain supply and increasing some crop prices . That means it is time to invest in farming stocks, such as Deere (ticker: DE), Corteva (CTVA), and Titan Machinery (TITN), according to Wall Street.
“Corn has rallied breaking out of a five-year range as persistent wetness has raised supply concerns,” Baird analyst Mig Dobre wrote in a Monday research report. “Prices seem poised to move higher; this helps farm economics which should drive equipment demand.”
Read more: Floods May Create a Corn Shortage. But Higher Prices Pose New Problems for Farmers.
Dobre upgraded shares of farm-equipment maker Deere and farm-equipment dealer Titan Machinery to Outperform from Neutral. He raised his price target on Deere stock   to $175—about 16% higher than recent trading levels—from $129. He increased his price target on Titan stock to $24 from $18. The new target represents 51% upside from recent levels.
Separately, Deutsche Bank analyst David Begleiter upgraded shares of agricultural input provider Corteva (CTVA) to Buy from Hold. His price target on Corteva shares is now $32—about 28% higher than recent levels—from $30 previously. (Barron’s recently recommended FMC (FMC), another company that makes agricultural inputs.)
Begleiter notes in his Monday research report that Corteva is off to a rocky start as an independent company, with the U.S.-China trade dispute and Midwestern flooding leading management to cut earning guidance. Now the stock is too cheap , according to the analyst.
Agriculture is a weather-driven cycle with crop prices dependent on the timing and amount of sun and rain in the U.S., Brazil, and Argentina—the largest exporters of crops globally. Crop prices set what farmers earn, and farmer earnings set volume and pricing for everything farmers use to grow crops—including the seeds and crop chemicals Corteva makes and the equipment Deere manufactures.
Farmers would rather have higher prices over higher volumes, Dobre says. Lower production means higher prices in the future, which is good for farmers’ long-term outlook and, therefore, good for these stocks.
Agricultural companies have struggled for much of the recent past, as years of good weather pushed crop prices lower. But corn prices—a benchmark agricultural commodity—have shot 37% higher in June, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture cut its 2019 corn yield and production estimates.
Deere stock is only up 1.6% year to date, worse than the 12% gain of the Dow Jones Industrial Average .
      FMC and Titan shares have performed better, up 25% and 21% year to date, respectively. Corteva stock has dropped more than 20% from where it began trading on May 24.
Midwestern flooding and persistent rain has made for a rough year for agricultural firms like Deere and Corteva.
