Iowa farmers have a lot of issues on their minds these days — trade wars, attacks on ethanol, low commodity prices — but chief among them is the timing of this fall's plant-killing freeze.
Farmers face yield losses that reach 15% to 20% without a late freeze, given cold and wet spring weather that caused corn and soybeans to be planted two to four weeks later than normal.
Corn is at risk of lower yields, since 20% of the state's crop was planted late. Soybeans, requiring a shorter growing season than corn, have largely caught up this summer, experts say.
"A lot of people will be hurt by even a normal freeze," said Curt Mether, who farms in western Iowa and is the Iowa Corn Growers Association board president.
In addition to lower yields, a corn crop killed before fully maturing also requires more drying, an increased expense when farmers can least afford it.
"This year will be a rough one, like we've seen in the last few years," said Chad Hart, an Iowa State University agricultural economist.
Prices for both corn and soybeans are below break-even, with the year offering only a few windows where prices were high enough for farmers to lock in profits.
Northern Iowa typically sees a freeze in early October that pushes to southern Iowa by month's end. Temperatures below 28 degrees shut down plant growth. "Farmers are hoping for a freeze closer to Halloween," Hart said.
Although it's too early to forecast, a plant-killing freeze in Iowa has come later in recent years, said Justin Gilsan, Iowa's state climatologist.
And the next two weeks are expected to have warmer-than-normal temperatures, putting them in the high 70s and low 80s, he said.
That's good news for farmers, said Mike Naig, Iowa's agriculture secretary. "This is definitely a year when we need a late frost," he said.
It's hard to see driving by Iowa's cornfields, but much of the state's crop needs more time to develop.
Only half of Iowa's corn acres were planted by mid-May, a time when most farmers expect to be done planting corn, said Mark Licht, an ISU assistant agronomy professor.
By early June, Iowa farmers had planted 80% of their corn, the smallest amount by that time in 37 years, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Flooding, heavy rains and cold temperatures meant farmers nationwide were unable to plant a record 19 million acres this year.
Iowa's unplanted acreage total hit 463,339, the most since USDA began reporting the data in 2007.
The planting delay means Iowa's corn crop now needs a couple of weeks to fill the kernels and add weight, Licht said.
Normally, corn kernels would fully fill around mid-September, he said, but it's now more likely to happen by month's end.
Without a late freeze, many farmers will see smaller, lighter kernels. "The later a farmer planted, the greater the yield penalty will be," Licht said.
Farmers also want more time so corn can dry in the field, rather than drying it in bins, either on the farm or at an elevator.
Both adding weight and drying is made tougher by fall's shorter days and cooler temperatures.
Even with a yield penalty, Iowa farmers might be sitting in a better position than growers in the rest of the Midwest, Hart said.
"When you think about a lot of the problems we had this spring, those were the problems we were seeing through the Midwest," he said.
"And the problems in states like Illinois, Indiana and Ohio were much larger than in Iowa. We're in relatively good shape."
Last month, the federal government cut Iowa and U.S. yield projections.
Iowa corn production dropped 5 bushels per acre to 191; soybeans dropped 2 bushels per acre to 55. U.S. yields for corn were cut by 6.9 bushels; and soybeans, 3.1 bushels.
Even with the reductions, "people feel USDA overestimated the crop," said Mether, the west-central farmer.
"Most farmers see fields in their area that weren't planted or planted late," making them question whether projections were low enough, he said.
Despite the yield reductions, USDA says Iowa farmers will harvest 2.52 billion bushels of corn this fall, 12.4 million more bushels than in 2018.
One reason for increased production: Iowa has 400,000 more acres devoted to corn this year than last year.
Iowa's soybean production — on 780,000 fewer acres — is projected to be nearly 63 million bushels lower than last year.
Iowa is the nation's largest corn grower and second-biggest soybean producer.
Farmers face continued pressure from trade disputes, lower demand
Hart said this month's USDA crop production report could shrink yields, a move that may boost corn and soybean prices.
The trouble, the ISU economist said, is that the agency also has reported continued declining demand for corn and soybeans, driven in part by escalating trade wars and declining ethanol demand.
The U.S. and China have battled over trade with increasing tit-for-tat tariffs over the past two years, hitting soybeans, hogs and other farm goods hard.
China slashed its U.S. farm purchases last year 53% to $9.2 billion from 2017. Soybeans purchases took a huge hit, falling nearly 75% to $3.1 billion.
And since taking office, President Trump's administration has granted 85 oil refineries a pass from buying 4 billion gallons of renewable fuel, killing demand for 1.4 billion bushels of corn used to make it, the renewable fuels industry says.
A yield-damaging freeze could drive prices higher, Hart said, but farmers also would face discounts with lower grain quality. "Farmers are feeling caught between a rock and a hard place," Hart said.
Donnelle Eller covers agriculture, the environment and energy for the Register. Reach her at deller@registermedia.com or 515-284-8457.
Your subscription makes work like this possible. Subscribe today at DesMoinesRegister.com/Deal .
