From charred sweetcorn to rum-glazed ribs, Ainsley Harriott shares his recipes for a perfect Bank Holiday barbecue
WITH pubs and restaurants closed, the nation has gone barbecue barmy during lockdown. Thanks to the beautiful weather we’ve enjoyed in recent weeks, grilling in the garden has become a pleasure unspoiled by restrictions.
Now, in an exclusive series, top chef Ainsley Harriott tells you how to barbecue like a pro this Bank Holiday. From Lime Breeze Prawns to his Brilliant Burgers plus salad and sides, the telly cook has you covered.
Ainsley Harriott tells you how to barbecue like a pro this Bank HolidayCredit: ITV Press Release
Ainsley, 63, said: “If you’re lucky enough to have a garden or outdoor space then dining outside is a great way to escape for a little while. It’s almost like a holiday.
“There’s something intimate about sitting around a barbecue, with the smell of the smoke and the food cooking. Of course, it would be nicer if we could enjoy it with more family and friends, but hopefully we’ll all be together again soon.
“The kind of foods I like to eat are pretty simple. Marinades are key to a good barbecue — marinate your meat and veg in delicious herbs and spices and let them soak up the flavours before cooking them.”
The TV favourite added: “We all like a burger or a sausage on the barbecue, but ­barbecues can be so much more than this and you can really experiment with world flavours.
From Lime Breeze Prawns to his Brilliant Burgers plus salad and sides, the telly cook has you coveredCredit: ITV
“At a time like this, our taste buds can still travel to exotic places even if we can’t. One of my favourite barbecue accompaniments has to be corn on the cob. You can really add exciting flavours to corn and it tastes so sweet and delicious when ­barbecued.
“I made some fantastic charred sweetcorn jackets with ras el hanout [a North African spice blend found in supermarkets] and lemon butter when I was in Marrakech. I also like to have a nice side of couscous with my barbecues.”
Recipes from Ainsley’s ­Mediterranean ­Cookbook (Ebury Press, £20), Ainsley’s Caribbean Kitchen: Delicious Feel Good Cooking From The ­Sunshine Islands (Ebury Press, £20) and Ultimate ­Barbecue Bible (BBC Books, £20) – all by Ainsley Harriott.
4 limes – zest and juice of 2, and the other 2 cut into wedges
Preheat the barbecue. If using wooden skewers, soak them in a bowl of water for ten minutes.
Combine the lime zest and juice and palm sugar in a bowl and give it a quick stir to break down any little nuggets of sugar.
Add the garlic, coconut milk and soy sauce, season with salt and pepper and stir to combine.
Add the prawns, mix together and set aside to marinate for ten to 15 minutes.
Thread three or four prawns on to each skewer with a lime wedge in between each one.
Barbecue over a medium heat for two to three minutes, turning continuously.
Basting keeps them moist and succulent and the tamarind delivers that gorgeous sweet-and-sour taste — glazed ribs are a summer favourite in my house.
