Gold price up as COVID-19 cases rise, U.S-China tensions heighten
The dollar’s rise to a near two-week high in the previous session subdued gold’s advance.
Gold price was up on Friday in Asia, backed by an increasingly rising number of COVID-19 cases in China as well as heightened tensions between the United States and China.
In Beijing, 25 new COVID-19 cases were reported and these cases were linked to an outbreak in Xinfadi market which now stands at almost 200. There was also an increased number of cases in many states of the U.S.
On the tensions between both developed nations, U.S President Donald Trump, also warned on Thursday that cutting ties with China was still a possibility. This came just a day after Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, met China’s top diplomat Yang Jiechi in Hawaii.
Consequently, Gold futures was up by 0.25% at $1,735.35, with investors turning to the asset as a safe store of value especially given the politically and financially uncertain times.
However, the dollar’s rise to a near two-week high in the previous session subdued gold’s advance.
Gold is a valuable metal, often been used by jewellers and the wealthy as a status symbol dating back to ancient periods. Global investors use precious metals like gold to hedge against inflation. A majority of U.S. reserves are also in Gold.
Your email address will not be published.
Production cuts from OPEC countries and other allies have helped to revive the price of Brent Crude.
The production output of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) member-countries has recorded its lowest level in nearly 30 years, due to production cuts after demand was heavily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The last time oil production was cut to 22 million barrels a day was during the Gulf War in 1991.
Last month, OPEC cut production to 22.69 million barrels per day, in an effort to strengthen global prices for the commodity which was struggling with weak demand during a global lockdown occasioned by the pandemic.
OPEC leader, Saudi Arabia, has been compliant in its production cuts through the month of June. Back home, Nigeria has promised to do its parts in implementing total compliance with the cuts.
Production cuts from OPEC countries and other allies such as Russia (OPEC+) have helped to revive the price of Brent Crude to over $40 since May, compared to record lows in the month of April.
While the Gulf nations have implemented further cuts, Nigeria, Angola and Iraq are still lagging in full compliance, meeting only 77%, 83%, and 70% (respectively) of their quotas. Saudi Arabia reduced production by 1.13 million barrels to 7.53 million a day in June.
READ ALSO: Brent crude surges past $40, analyst recommends investment in crude oil derivatives
Other members like Venezuela pumped only 340,000 barrels a day in June, even though they are exempted from cuts as the country is dealing with a series of issues from US sanctions to a severe economic recession.
Meanwhile, Russia hit its target quota for the second month in a row as countries outside the OPEC also cut production due to falling demand impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
