Gold was up again on Wednesday in Asia, leveraging on its gains from the previous session. The safe-haven asset had jumped by 1.2% during the previous session.
Gold was up again on Wednesday in Asia, leveraging on its gains from the previous session. The safe-haven asset had jumped by 1.2% during the previous session, after which Gold futures moved up to the price of $1722.75 as at 4pm local time.
Also worthy of note is that a number of stocks, which typically move inversely to gold, were predominantly up.
The price increase was as a result of the optimism of investors, albeit cautiously, ahead of the U.S. Federal Reserve unveiling key details from its policy meeting, which is scheduled to be concluded later in the day. This optimism rests on expectations that the details of the policy meeting will include even more stimulus measures for the U.S economy towards revamping it against the backdrop of disruptions caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.
READ ALSO: Nigerian banking stocks remain most liquid stocks, as investors gain N25.1 billion
David Meger, director of metals trading at High Ridge Futures, in a conversation with CNBC explained that “The expectations of further Fed stimulus are in the forefront of what’s been supporting gold over the last couple of days. In addition, we’re also seeing global equities tick lower slightly across the board.”
Your email address will not be published.
Production cuts from OPEC countries and other allies have helped to revive the price of Brent Crude.
The production output of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) member-countries has recorded its lowest level in nearly 30 years, due to production cuts after demand was heavily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The last time oil production was cut to 22 million barrels a day was during the Gulf War in 1991.
Last month, OPEC cut production to 22.69 million barrels per day, in an effort to strengthen global prices for the commodity which was struggling with weak demand during a global lockdown occasioned by the pandemic.
OPEC leader, Saudi Arabia, has been compliant in its production cuts through the month of June. Back home, Nigeria has promised to do its parts in implementing total compliance with the cuts.
Production cuts from OPEC countries and other allies such as Russia (OPEC+) have helped to revive the price of Brent Crude to over $40 since May, compared to record lows in the month of April.
While the Gulf nations have implemented further cuts, Nigeria, Angola and Iraq are still lagging in full compliance, meeting only 77%, 83%, and 70% (respectively) of their quotas. Saudi Arabia reduced production by 1.13 million barrels to 7.53 million a day in June.
READ ALSO: Brent crude surges past $40, analyst recommends investment in crude oil derivatives
Other members like Venezuela pumped only 340,000 barrels a day in June, even though they are exempted from cuts as the country is dealing with a series of issues from US sanctions to a severe economic recession.
Meanwhile, Russia hit its target quota for the second month in a row as countries outside the OPEC also cut production due to falling demand impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
