Gold futures kept the momentum up as more investors turned to the safe-haven asset.
Gold futures surged on Monday morning at London’s trading session, reaching its highest point at $1,775 since May 2020 before trading presently at $1,761 at the time this report was written.
This came as a result of the increasing number of COVID-19 cases across the world, making investors even more pessimistic about the possibility of quick economic recovery.
The World Health Organization (WHO) reported a record of 183,020 cases yesterday, Sunday, with about 9 million global cases as of June 22, according to data from Johns Hopkins University.
Michael McCarthy, the chief strategist at CMC Markets, explained that “General risk aversion is helping the market. We are seeing pressure on growth exposed currencies and on share markets. Overall, there are concerns about increasing infection rates…the market is concerned about the outlook for growth and that, of course, is supportive for gold.”
Gold futures kept the momentum up as more investors turned to the safe-haven asset after witnessing the surge in cases of the COVID-19 pandemic over the weekend. Announcements by two U.S. Federal Reserve officials that the U.S. could have an even high unemployment rate if the virus is not curtailed now, expectedly dampened investor sentiment.
Hong Kong National Security Law developments also played a part in the rush to Gold. China had released details yesterday, Saturday, about its planned national security laws which are to be enacted in Hong Kong and Macau. They had done this with clear details that reveal that Beijing will have the powers to enforce all laws. Note that Gold is perceived as a safe store of value during times of political and financial uncertainty.
Your email address will not be published.
Production cuts from OPEC countries and other allies have helped to revive the price of Brent Crude.
The production output of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) member-countries has recorded its lowest level in nearly 30 years, due to production cuts after demand was heavily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The last time oil production was cut to 22 million barrels a day was during the Gulf War in 1991.
Last month, OPEC cut production to 22.69 million barrels per day, in an effort to strengthen global prices for the commodity which was struggling with weak demand during a global lockdown occasioned by the pandemic.
OPEC leader, Saudi Arabia, has been compliant in its production cuts through the month of June. Back home, Nigeria has promised to do its parts in implementing total compliance with the cuts.
Production cuts from OPEC countries and other allies such as Russia (OPEC+) have helped to revive the price of Brent Crude to over $40 since May, compared to record lows in the month of April.
While the Gulf nations have implemented further cuts, Nigeria, Angola and Iraq are still lagging in full compliance, meeting only 77%, 83%, and 70% (respectively) of their quotas. Saudi Arabia reduced production by 1.13 million barrels to 7.53 million a day in June.
READ ALSO: Brent crude surges past $40, analyst recommends investment in crude oil derivatives
Other members like Venezuela pumped only 340,000 barrels a day in June, even though they are exempted from cuts as the country is dealing with a series of issues from US sanctions to a severe economic recession.
Meanwhile, Russia hit its target quota for the second month in a row as countries outside the OPEC also cut production due to falling demand impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
