CORN — The corn market was stuck in a trading range where it touched $3.90 every day from Jan. 27 to Feb. 19, before seeing two big down days to close the week. The big driver to the late weakness was the new data from the U.S. Department of Agriculture outlook conference.
The latest estimate for upcoming planted acreage is 94.0 million with harvested acres at 86.6 million. The yield is projected at 178.5 bushels per acre, which would put production at 15.46 billion bushels. The bottom line is, the carryout stands at 2.637 billion bushels which is certainly casting a very heavy bearish blanket on the market right now.
The other big factor which faced a lot of scrutiny was around Chinese purchases. The USDA posted a $3 billion dollar increase in ag exports despite a much higher target agreed to in the Phase 1 agreement. USDA secretary Sonny Perdue said that Phase 1 details were not included in the outlook forum forecasts due to significant uncertainties — primarily due to the coronavirus.
The coronavirus continues to be a threat to the ag markets. The number of new cases continues to climb along with the number of fatalities. There are now more than 75,000 cases with 2,200 deaths. China continues to extend shutdowns across the country in order to contain and prevent the spread of the virus. Production continues to be reduced — affecting refinery production, automobile manufacturing, and movement of goods including those in the ag space.
Another possible threat on the horizon is looming. China will launch a $200 million dollar fund to combat an increasing infestation of army worms along with a possible invasion of locusts across their agricultural sector this year.
Weekly export sales were really good this week at just over 49 million bushels. This is the third-best sales total of the year so far. There has been a nice surge in sales the past six weeks with sales above 30 million bushels in each of those weeks.
Ethanol production was higher by 7,000 barrels per day to 1,040,000 bpd this week. Stocks were up by .4 million to 24.8 million barrels. This is a new all-time record for ethanol stocks.
Outlook: The corn market has a headwind of bearish USDA to fight against. The corn bulls are hoping that Chinese purchases can help jump start the market.
SOYBEANS — July beans have been extremely rangebound — settling between $9.00 and $9.20 every day since Jan. 31. The ongoing coronavirus continues to add bearish pressure to the complex. Until China turns the corner on the outbreak, a wave of new bean purchases seems unlikely. It is South America’s export window right now, so big purchases from China via the United States will have to wait.
The USDA outlook forum projected upcoming acreage at 85.0 million with harvested acres at 84.2 million. They are using a yield of 49.8 bushels per acre which gives a production of 4.195 billion bushels. The carry is projected at 320 million bushels. The last time we saw a carryout of that size was 2016-17, and the average farm price on beans was $9.47
Exports were really poor this week at only 18 million bushels. In the past nine weeks, the highest export total has only been 29 million bushels. Luckily there was good buying by China to give overall sales a lead on the USDA pace. The wildcard remains Chinese purchases for the rest of the year.
Outlook: All eyes are on China. What will happen with the coronavirus? Will we see any Phase 1 purchases in soybeans? Lots of unknowns here, but the price action in futures seems like the market is remaining extremely flat until some of these questions are answered.
