Results for the First Quarter of 2020:
Net loss attributable to the company of $16.4 million, or $(0.47) per diluted share including a non-cash goodwill impairment and an adjustment in income tax benefits related to the CARES Act
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $205.5 million; $260.8 million available under working capital facilities
OMAHA, Neb., May  04, 2020  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Green Plains Inc. (NASDAQ: GPRE ) today announced financial results for the first quarter of 2020. Net loss attributable to the company was $16.4 million, or $(0.47) per diluted share, for the first quarter of 2020 compared with a net loss of $42.8 million, or $(1.06) per diluted share, for the same period in 2019. Revenues were $632.9 million for the first quarter of 2020 compared with $438.6 million for the same period last year.
“Our ability to generate positive adjusted EBITDA was driven primarily by the execution of our risk management programs which had a direct positive impact on achieving better than market margins as well as our continuing efforts to reduce our operating costs through Project 24, thus reducing the impact of recent market volatility. As a result, our balance sheet and liquidity remain strong with over $205 million in cash at the end of the first quarter, and what we believe to be ample working capital to continue execution of our strategy even as the disruptions from COVID-19 have reduced short term demand for biofuel and liquid fuels,” said Todd Becker, president and chief executive officer. “As news of the energy trade war and the pandemic began to surface, we quickly hedged the first quarter using our risk management strategies and we have continued these strategies into the second quarter. The actions we have taken over the past several years have put us in position to weather the current crisis as we focus on keeping strong liquidity, reducing our operating cost per gallon and managing risk.”
In April, Green Plains announced the successful startup of high protein production at its Shenandoah biorefinery. The company has seen very positive results from operations of the system and has begun to ramp production to 100% of planned capacity. The majority of the production has been sold for 2020 for use in pet food and aquafeed. In addition, our Project 24 initiative remains on track with the completion of the upgrades at Wood River, Neb., Superior, Iowa, and Fergus Falls, Minn. The upgrade at Fairmont, Minn. is expected to be completed over the next 60 days. Additionally, Green Plains Cattle Company achieved record results during the quarter as demand for cattle remains strong.
“We continued to focus on our Total Transformation Plan during the first quarter by adding high protein and novel feed ingredient production to our platform, while returning to being a low cost, closed loop and sustainable biofuels producer,” commented Becker. “The successful startup of our protein facility in Shenandoah, Iowa is instrumental to the future direction of Green Plains. We have streamlined startup operations and will be engaging our biotechnology partner in the near future to accelerate the transition to even better nutritional content. With that said, we are achieving better than expected protein levels without enzymatic solutions, which gives us the confidence we will achieve better pricing for our products. We believe our products will serve as a preferred alternative to other high value proteins currently used in pet and aqua diets, which could drive our margin uplift to $0.20 per gallon or more.”
“We operated our biorefineries at 86% utilization in the first quarter, which was slightly lower than our goal of 90% due to extended shut downs required for Project 24 upgrades,” stated Becker. “We have now completed three Project 24 upgrades. This enhances our operational competitiveness as these biorefineries now move solidly into the top quartile of plants in the industry. This project has exceeded our expectation on cost reductions and we expect the fourth upgrade at our Fairmont, Minnesota facility to be completed over the next quarter.”
“As per our previous announcements regarding our donations and sales of FDA approved FCC Grade alcohol the company produces at our York, Nebraska biorefinery, we also continue to supply commercial customers our product for use in hand sanitizers and other critical cleaning products,” added Becker. “Our facility is unique as the end product is distilled specifically for the production of cleaning products and disinfectants and is higher in purity and quality than traditional fuel grade ethanol. Green Plains will not sell any fuel grade ethanol for use in disinfectants or sanitizers. We anticipate these sales will have a positive impact on the second quarter.”
Green Plains produced 240.5 million gallons of ethanol during the first quarter of 2020, compared with 155.0 million gallons for the same period in 2019. The adjusted consolidated ethanol crush margin was $(2.3) million, or $(0.01) per gallon, for the first quarter of 2020, compared with $(12.8) million, or $(0.08) per gallon, for the same period in 2019. The consolidated ethanol crush margin is the ethanol production segment’s operating income before depreciation and amortization, which includes corn oil, plus intercompany storage, transportation and other fees, net of related expenses and adjusted for non-cash goodwill impairment.
During the first quarter, Green Plains recorded a non-cash pre-tax charge related to the impairment of goodwill of $24.1 million. In March, the company’s market capitalization declined significantly due to macroeconomic conditions and the COVID-19 pandemic which led to a drop in demand for ethanol globally. Green Plains determined a triggering event occurred resulting in the company performing an interim impairment test as of March 31, 2020. The results of both the qualitative and quantitative impairment tests indicated that an impairment of goodwill assets in the ethanol production segment had occurred. The impairment is a non-cash charge and will not impact the company’s cash flow or cash balances.
Consolidated revenues increased $194.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020, compared with the same period in 2019, due primarily to higher production volumes of ethanol, distillers grains and corn oil.
Operating loss increased $15.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020, compared with the same period last year primarily due to the write-off of goodwill in the ethanol production segment. Interest expense for the three months ended March 31, 2020, was comparable with the same period in 2019. Income tax benefit was $44.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2020, compared with $12.9 million for the same period in 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $21.0 million due to equity earnings from the Green Plains Cattle Company joint venture as well as higher earnings from our ethanol production segment excluding the goodwill impairment.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was signed into law on March 27, 2020. The CARES Act includes several significant business tax provisions, one of which allows a business to carry back net operating losses (“NOL”) arising in 2018, 2019 and 2020 to the five prior years. For the three months ended March 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of approximately $28.4 million associated with the carry back of the NOL generated in 2019 to the 2014 tax year, as well as the release of a previously recorded valuation allowance against the 2019 NOL and other deferred tax assets.
The company reports the financial and operating performance for the following four operating segments: (1) ethanol production, which includes the production of ethanol, distillers grains and corn oil, (2) agribusiness and energy services, which includes grain handling and storage, commodity marketing and merchant trading for company-produced and third-party ethanol, distillers grains, corn oil, natural gas and other commodities, (3) food and ingredients, which includes food-grade corn oil and (4) partnership, which includes fuel storage and transportation services. Intercompany fees charged to the ethanol production segment for storage and logistics services, grain procurement and product sales are included in the partnership and agribusiness and energy services segments and eliminated upon consolidation. Third-party costs of grain consumed and revenues from product sales are reported directly in the ethanol production segment.
