Get fired up! It's time to grill. Matt Moore, author of Serial Griller: Grillmaster Secrets for Flame-Cooked Perfection, joined us to share what he learned on a tour across America where he rounded up coveted recipes, and indispensable tips from grill masters. He also shared some great recipes you can grill up for a delicious dinner!
All recipes excerpted from Serial Griller: Grillmaster Secrets for Flame-Cooked Perfection 2020 by Matt Moore. Photography  2020 by Andrea Behrends and Helene Dujardin. Reproduced by permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. All rights reserved.
All you novice grillers out there: This recipe is going to be your go-to. Chicken thighs are one of the most forgivable cuts of meat to grill. Inattentive cooks are often surprised to find that they are still moist and juicy inside even if over-charred outside. I don’t recommend that, but it’s nice to know. To add even more depth and moisture, I love to serve meaty grilled thighs with a fresh herb salsa, typically just using a mix of whatever fresh herbs I have on hand. The secret of the salsa is the anchovy. Don’t skip this ingredient! It provides the savory umami flavor that brings all the other flavors together.
Open the bottom vent of a charcoal grill completely. Light a charcoal chimney starter filled with charcoal. When the coals are covered with gray ash, pour them onto the bottom grate of the grill. Adjust vents as needed to maintain an internal temperature of 400 to 450F. Coat the top grate with oil; place on the grill. (If using a gas grill, pre-heat to medium-high[400 to 450F].)
Sprinkle the chicken evenly with the salt and pep-per. Place on the oiled grates. Grill, covered, until charred on both sides and a thermometer inserted in thickest portion of the chicken registers 170F, about 5 minutes per side.
Meanwhile, place the shallot, capers, parsley, mint, basil, thyme, garlic, and anchovy fillets on a cutting board. Chop the mixture until the consistency resembles a rough paste; drizzle with the oil.
Remove the chicken from the grill and place directly on the shallot mixture on the cutting board. Let rest for 5 minutes. Slice the chicken against the grain into  1/2-inch-thick slices and toss gently with the shallot mixture. Serve directly off the cutting board, family style, alongside hot rice.
Part of the fun of cooking this recipe is just saying buttah. It should roll off your tongue slowly, like a Deep South drawl, emulating the rich smoothness that melting butter adds to deliciously sweet and smoky corn. Gild the lily by finishing the ears with some salty, tangy feta.
1/2 cup (4 ounces) unsalted butter, softened
2 tablespoons chopped fresh dill, plus more for garnish
8 ears fresh yellow corn, shucked
Open the bottom vent of a charcoal grill completely. Light a charcoal chimney starter filled with charcoal. When the coals are covered with gray ash, pour them onto the bottom grate of the grill. Adjust the vents as needed to maintain an internal temperature of 450 to 500F. Coat the top grate with oil; place on the grill. (If using a gas grill, preheat to high [450 to 500F].)
Stir together the butter, dill, lemon zest and juice, salt, and pepper in a bowl until well combined. (If making ahead, store in the refrigerator, covered, for up to 5 days; let come to room temperature 5 minutes before using.)
Place the corn on the oiled grates. Grill, uncovered and turning often, until charred on all sides, about 8 minutes. Transfer to a serving platter. Brush each corn ear with 1 1/2 tablespoons of the dill butter and sprinkle with  1/2 tablespoon of the feta. Garnish with additional dill.
Grilled asparagus is made even better with bacon. Seriously, what isn’t made better with bacon? Because the two items have varied cooking times, it’s important to slightly cook the bacon prior to wrapping up and grilling the asparagus bundles. Use the best, thick-cut bacon you can find. My go-to is Benton’s bacon from my neck of the woods in Tennessee. I like to pair the bundles with grilled steaks or chops.
1 bunch (about 14 ounces) fresh asparagus, trimmed
Open the bottom vent of a charcoal grill completely. Light a charcoal chimney starter filled with charcoal. When the coals are covered with gray ash, pour them onto the bottom grate of the grill. Adjust the vents as needed to maintain an internal temperature of 400 to 450F. Coat the top grate with oil; place on the grill. (If using a gas grill, preheat to medium-high [400 to 450F].)
Place the bacon on a microwavable plate between two paper towels. Microwave on HIGH until cooked through butstill pliable, about 1 1/2 minutes. Set aside at room temperature until cool enough to handle, about 5 minutes.
Toss together the asparagus, olive oil, salt, and pepper in a bowl; divide evenly into four portions with the asparagus tips pointing in the same direction. Cut the bacon slices in half crosswise. Wrap one bacon piece around each asparagus bundle, leaving tips exposed, and secure bundle with kitchen twine.
Place the bundles on the oiled grates. Grill, covered and turning often, until the bacon is crispy and the asparagus is lightly charred, 8 to 10 minutes. Transfer to a serving platter. Drizzle with extra-virgin olive oil and balsamic glaze and sprinkle with the chives.
