Having trouble finding local sweet corn for the Fourth of July? Here’s why
Farmers in some parts of Pennsylvania will have locally grown sweet corn ready for consumers this weekend.Bill Gallo Jr. | For NJ.com)
Farmer’s markets and roadside farm stands in some parts of Pennsylvania may have locally grown sweet corn for barbecues and picnics over the July Fourth holiday.
In other parts of the state the best that can be found will be corn brought in from elsewhere while we wait for the locally grown freshness later this month.
Local sweet corn will be more widely available for the upcoming holiday weekend in the southeastern and southcentral parts of the state, according to an informal survey by the Pennsylvania Farm Bureau.
Fewer farms in the northern and western parts of the state will have local corn available before mid-July.
Asking farmers what they’re experiencing in their fields, the bureau found that the cold weather in April and May is impacting the availability of corn now.
Other factors, such as planting methods, also contribute to when farms will have sweet corn available.
“While some farms may not have sweet corn available until later in the season, they have many other delicious items that are in season now,” said PFB President Rick Ebert. “Pennsylvania has the most farms of any state that sell directly to customers through on-farm stores, roadside stands, farmers markets, community supported agriculture and more. That means Pennsylvanians have a great opportunity to support their local economy by enjoying farm-fresh food.
Farmers surveyed by PFB who are expecting a later sweet corn crop this year said that is largely due to cold weather in April and May, especially the mid-May snowstorm that affected the western and northern parts of the state.
But some farmers in those areas most affected by the cold weather were able to move up harvest through strategies such as planting under plastic or cloth to control moisture and trap heat.
The bureau noted that some farm markets and roadside stands in Pennsylvania typically do not have locally-grown sweet corn available until at least the middle of July, especially farms located in the northern part of the state, but they may have corn available to sell from other parts of Pennsylvania or a southern state.
In the survey, the bureau heard from farmers in Blair, Bucks, Butler, Lehigh, Susquehanna, Warren, Westmoreland and York counties.
Thanks for visiting PennLive. Quality local journalism has never been more important. We need your support. Not a subscriber yet? Please consider supporting our work .
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
