1 cup almond milk/coconut milk or dairy cream (if you’re going the milk route, decorate with grated strong cheese like feta, parmesan, or crumble a little blue cheese on top of the soup.)
Place peas, garlic, curry powder, and vegetable broth into soup pot and boil. Add milk and mint, bring to a boil and blend until smooth. Add salt and pepper to taste.
Dissolve 1 sachet of rapid rising yeast in 2 cups of warm water. Place 3 cups of bread or cake flour one at a time into water, mixing well with a wooden spoon after each addition. Finally, add 1½ tsp salt and continue to mix until smooth. Remember that this is a very loose, wet dough, so don’t add any more flour. Cover with cling wrap or place bowl into a large plastic bag. Place in fridge for 1 to 3 days – the flavour intensifies with time. It should go bubbly. If you really want it urgently, leave it in a warm place for two hours, then bake as below. When ready to bake, place dutch oven or cast iron pot with a lid into the oven and preheat the oven with the pot on 230°C for 30 minutes. Meanwhile, sprinkle some flour (about 1½ tbls) onto a piece of baking paper which can be bigger than the pot so that it overlaps.
Place or rather pour the dough onto the lightly flour-dusted paper and fold it over itself 4 times, by lifting the paper on all sides or with a bread scraper. Remove the pot from the oven with thick oven gloves as the pot is very hot. Place the dough, still on the paper, into the pot and bake on 230 for 30 minutes, covered. Remove lid and bake until golden brown and crispy, then remove from oven (about 12 to 15 minutes).
I doubled up on the recipe and divided the dough in two and left one batch in the fridge for 24 hours and the other 48. I then started a rotation system so that I always had a batch of dough in my fridge or on my table, which is a real win during lockdown. If you don’t have a le creuset pot or similar heavy-based cast iron pot, then you can use a bread tin or cake tin and place a small ovenproof bowl filled with water into the oven. The heavy-based pots create their own steam with their lids on and don’t need the bowl of water.
Enjoy with lashings of butter!
