Temperatures of 28°F. or lower for a couple of hours will be lethal to growing tissue that has emerged.
AMES, IA - Temperature is critical for both corn and soybeans. Temperatures of 28°F. or lower for a couple of hours will be lethal to growing tissue that has emerged. Temperatures between 28°F. and 32°F. will result in minimal frost injury to above-ground tissue. And temperatures between 32°F. and 50°F. could result in poor vigor and growth.
Mark Licht is an Extension cropping systems specialist at Iowa State University and says to keep in mind that dew point temperatures are several degrees lower. He points this out because in low-lying areas or areas with no wind, air temperature could be slightly lower. One additional consideration is that warmer soils help buffer emerged seedlings by radiational warming of air just above the soil surface. If you really want to know what temperature emerged seedlings are exposed to, place a thermometer on at the soil surface and check it just before sunrise.
Regardless of temperatures, the next couple of days will put planted corn and soybeans at greater risk for pathogen infection. Make sure to get out into your fields toward the middle to the end of next week to assess stands. For frost-injured crops, wait at least three days (maybe even five to 10 days if temperature is slow to rebound) following the last frost occurrence to fully assess living vs. damaged or injured tissue.
READ MORE: Frost to hit the Corn Belt Friday night, forecaster says
Yellow corn will quickly respond to the sunlight and increased temperatures. Frost-injured, water-soaked corn likely won’t grow, but if the growing point is still viable (cold temperature did not penetrate to the growing point), the plants will have to slough off the dead tissue. A dead growing point is unlikely unless temperatures get 28°F. or lower for several hours.
Soybean cotyledons are resilient to cold temperatures. Expect some frost damage to cotyledons and hypocotyl around the margins, but survival is likely unless there were several hours of temperatures below 30°F. The apical meristem and/or auxiliary buds are not expected to be killed at temperatures down to 28°F.
Licht says regardless of emergence or not, patience will be the key. Assess stands after three to five days. If above-ground vegetation is dead, look below ground to check for viable growing tissue.
