Imports to set the tone for UK feed grains: Grain Market Daily
New-crop UK feed wheat futures continued their retreat yesterday, with no new news to sustain their recent rally. Nov-20 futures fell a further £2.25/t yesterday, closing at £169.25/t.
Global wheat futures have also seen declines this week, with recent weather drivers seemingly priced in. Movements in UK markets have been more erratic over the past week with large changes in sterling affecting the UK’s relationship to global futures.
Looking ahead, the weather picture for key wheat regions in Russia and Ukraine is trending drier again over the coming fortnight. This dryness could offer further weather support if realised.
As we move towards harvest 2020, the value of imported grains and oilseeds will play a key role in setting the price of domestic supplies, the value of imported maize will prove pivotal to setting values in feed markets.
Over the past couple of seasons, we have seen increased usage of imported maize in animal feed and human and industrial use. The comparatively low cost of maize has made it an attractive option for domestic consumers.
Last week, Black Sea maize (CIF Rotterdam, Nov-Dec) at port in the EU was quoted at £142.07/t - £144.52/t, by comparison UK feed wheat (Delivered Avonrange, Nov) was worth £178.00/t.
Obviously this is not a direct reflection of the cost of importing maize into the UK as we need to include extra freight to the UK, related costs and haulage to inland demand points, but can give a good indication of its competitiveness.
At the discounts we are seeing, imported maize may ease some of the pressure of a tight domestic wheat crop.
We have seen the impact of cheap maize previously, last season a large volume of maize was booked for import without a direct home, this maize stock then weighed heavily on the market pressuring domestic grain prices. This is a price risk we need to be aware of next season.
Finally, it is important to consider where next for maize values. Global maize stocks are anticipated to be heavy next season, with large production in South America, Ukraine and the US, combined with poor demand.
However, the return of demand from the ethanol sector and the large short position currently held by managed money funds in Chicago corn futures could signal a firming of markets, narrowing the spread between wheat and maize.
At AHDB we will continue to monitor the relative import parities.
You can subscribe to receive Grain Market Daily straight to your inbox. Simply fill in your contact details on our online form and select the information you wish to receive.
The release of the latest AHDB usage data has shown animal feed production down across all sectors in May.
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES) estimates that Australia’s wheat production for 2020/21 will reach 26.6Mt, up 11.5Mt on the year.
UK feed barley prices could face further pressure in 2020/21 after data shows Canadian farmers have planted the most acres to barley since 2009.
Although yields are uncertain, there will be another significant barley crop this year. Prices may see pressure later in harvest from the spring crop, and then may gain slightly as farmer selling slows.
Top global grain supplier Russia are already proposing the imposition an export quota onto the second half (Jan -Jun) of the 2020/21 marketing year, although the volume has not been announced it has potential ramifications for global and UK prices.
UK wheat could receive either a boost or come under additional pressure in the next few weeks from what happens to US maize crops as they’re now at a critical growth stage.
Have you factored these risks into your marketing plan, cash flow and business plan for the next 2 seasons?
Now that the latest WASDE report figures are known, it is important to examine the other factors that could provide sentiment for wheat markets between now and harvest.
In response to the continued dry weather through May, the EU’s Crop Monitoring (MARS) service has further downgraded its forecasts for UK crop yields, including spring barley.
Wheat prices fall as USDA increases stocks: Grain Market Daily
US wheat markets fell to a 3-week low at close yesterday and imposed pressure on global and UK wheat markets to follow. Global wheat season-end stocks and US wheat production estimates were raised in the USDA’s world supply and demand estimates (WASDE) released yesterday.
New crop delivered milling wheat premiums (North West) have recently extended to their widest point over new crop feed futures, in June, since 2011/12.
The latest crop development report released last month does not pose much confidence for UK rapeseed in 2020/21.
UK feed wheat futures prices have been variable over recent weeks, at least in part due to uncertainty over the impact of unfavourable weather on crops in Europe and the Black Sea region.
Barley usage for the brewing, malting and distilling sector in April was just 114.7kt. This is the lowest figure in over a decade.
As we move towards harvest 2020, the value of imported grains and oilseeds will play a key role in setting the price of domestic supplies, the value of imported maize will prove pivotal to setting values in feed markets.
An update to US planting figures: Grain market daily
Planting figures for US maize and soyabean crops were slightly below market pre-release estimates, according to Monday’s US crop progress report. Progress has slowed from the rapid pace seen at the start of the season, but remains above the five-year average (2015-19).
Higher UK wheat supplies due to a large production year and relatively stable demand, combined with our export campaign slowing considerably post October have resulted in a large increase in closing stocks.
During our barley week last week, we highlighted the increase in trade tensions between China and Australia, with the former potentially imposing a $74/t tariff on imports of Australian barley. This offers a high degree of price risk for domestic barley, particularly given the significant export volumes expected from the UK next year.
News of countries beginning to ease lockdown measures has enabled vegetable oil prices to show some signs of recovery. UK rapeseed prices have benefitted from both this rise in Paris futures and a weakening GBP/EUR exchange rate.
In the latest ADAS Crop Condition report, 26% of winter wheat is rated ‘very poor’ or ‘poor’, this is a considerably large increase from last year when it was 5%.
