First quarter operating income was $27 million, up $3 million from a year ago as favorable price mix more than offset foreign currency impacts. Excluding foreign currency impacts, segment operating income was up 21 percent from the same period last year.
In March 2020, the Company maintained the quarterly dividend at $0.63 per share and paid dividends of $42 million in the first quarter.
Due to the uncertainty of the effects of COVID-19, the Company has determined that its previous guidance for full year 2020 EPS, cash flow from operations and net sales outlook is no longer applicable. The impact of COVID-19 in the first quarter was relatively modest. We saw higher volumes in more traditional channels as consumers stocked their pantries in anticipation of stay-at-home restrictions, and we expect these channels to continue to perform well. However, significant uncertainty exists in the food service sector as to when and at what pace consumer traffic begins to return.
In South America, the pandemic is at an earlier stage and we anticipate significant negative impacts to the food service, brewery and confectionary sectors. In North America, we expect reduced demand in food service volumes, and specifically in Mexico, depressed brewery volumes due to government imposed
In EMEA, we anticipate strong specialty sales in Europe, but weaker volumes in Pakistan. In Asia-Pacific, as restrictions are being lifted, we are seeing relatively strong demand recovery. However, it is too early to determine if that recovery will be sustained.
For the full year, we expect a reported tax rate of 28.5 percent to 32 percent and an adjusted effective tax rate range of approximately 26 percent to 27 percent.
Committed capital investments are anticipated to be between $285 million to $305 million, assuming that equipment orders, access to our sites, and contractor safety can be maintained.
Ingredion will conduct a conference call today at 9 a.m. ET (8 a.m. CT) hosted by Jim Zallie, president and chief executive officer, and James Gray, executive vice president and chief financial officer. The call will be webcast in real time and will include a visual presentation accessible through the Ingredion website at https://ir.ingredionincorporated.com/ , in the "Events and Presentations" section, under "News and Events.” The presentation will be available to download a few hours prior to the start of the call. A replay of the webcast will be available for a limited time at https://ir.ingredionincorporated.com/ .
Jim Zallie and James Gray will participate virtually in the BMO Farm-to-Market conference on May 13, 2020 at 11:20 a.m. ET.  The presentation will be available on the Company’s website, https://ir.ingredionincorporated.com/ , in the "Events and Presentations" section, under "News and Events.”  Additionally, Ingredion will host its’ annual meeting of stockholders virtually on Wednesday, May 20, 2020 at 9:00 a.m. CT. The annual meeting can be accessed by visiting www.virtualshareholdermeeting.com/INGR2020 .
Ingredion Incorporated (NYSE: INGR) headquartered in the suburbs of Chicago, is a leading global ingredient solutions provider serving customers in more than 120 countries. With 2019 annual net sales over $6 billion, the Company turns grains, fruits, vegetables and other plant-based materials into value-added ingredients solutions for the food, beverage, animal nutrition, brewing and industrial markets. With Ingredion Idea Labs® innovation centers around the world and more than 11,000 employees, the Company co-creates with customers and fulfills its purpose of bringing the potential of people, nature and technology together to make life better. Visit ingredion.com for more information and the latest Company news.
This news release contains or may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The Company intends these forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for such statements.
Forward-looking statements include, among others, any statements regarding the Company's expectations regarding its effective tax rates and committed capital investments for 2020 and any assumptions, expectations or beliefs underlying the foregoing. These statements can sometimes be identified by the use of forward looking words such as "may," "will," "should," "anticipate," "assume," "believe," "plan," "project," "estimate," "expect," "intend," "continue," "pro forma," "forecast," "outlook," "propels," "opportunities," "potential," "provisional," or other similar expressions or the negative thereof. All statements other than statements of historical facts in this release or referred to in this release are "forward-looking statements."
These statements are based on current circumstances or expectations, but are subject to certain inherent risks and uncertainties, many of which are difficult to predict and are beyond our control. Although we believe our expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, investors are cautioned that no assurance can be given that our expectations will prove correct.
Actual results and developments may differ materially from the expectations expressed in or implied by our forward looking statements as a result of the following risks and uncertainties, among others:  changing consumption preferences and perceptions, including those relating to high fructose corn syrup; the effects of global economic conditions and the general political, economic, business, and market conditions that affect customers and consumers in the various geographic regions and countries in which we buy our raw materials or manufacture or sell our products, including, particularly, economic, currency and political conditions in South America and economic and political conditions in Europe, and the impact these factors may have on our sales volumes, the pricing of our products, our access to credit markets and our ability to collect our receivables from customers; adverse changes in investment returns earned on our pension assets; future financial performance of major industries which we serve and from which we derive a significant portion of our sales, including the food, beverage, animal nutrition, and brewing industries; the uncertainty of acceptance of products developed through genetic modification and biotechnology; our ability to develop or acquire new products and services at rates or of qualities sufficient to meet expectations; changes in U.S. and foreign government policy, laws or regulations and costs of legal compliance; increased competitive and/or customer pressure in the corn-refining industry and related industries, including with respect to the markets and prices for our primary products and our co-products, particularly corn oil; the availability of raw materials, including potato starch, tapioca, gum Arabic and the specific varieties of corn upon which some of our products are based, and our ability to pass on potential increases in the cost of corn or other raw materials to customers; raw material and energy costs and availability; our ability to contain costs, achieve budgets and to realize expected synergies, including with respect to our ability to complete planned maintenance and investment projects on time and on budget, and to achieve expected savings under our Cost Smart program as well as with respect to freight and shipping costs; the impact of financial and capital markets on our borrowing costs, including as a result of foreign currency fluctuations, fluctuations in interest and exchange rates and market volatility and the associated risks of hedging against such fluctuations; the potential effects of climate change; our ability to successfully identify and complete acquisitions or strategic alliances on favorable terms as well as our ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses or implement and maintain strategic alliances and achieve anticipated synergies with respect to all of the foregoing; operating difficulties at our manufacturing plants or with respect to boiler reliability; risks related to product safety and quality and compliance with environmental, health and safety, and food safety laws and regulations; economic, political and other risks inherent in operating in foreign countries with foreign currencies and shipping products between countries, including with respect to tariffs, quotas and duties; interruptions, security breaches or failures that might affect our information technology systems, processes and sites; our ability to maintain satisfactory labor relations; the impact that weather, natural disasters, war or similar acts of hostility, acts and threats of terrorism, the outbreak or continuation of pandemics such as COVID 19 and other significant events could have on our business; the potential recognition of impairment charges on goodwill or long lived assets; changes in our tax rates or exposure to additional income tax liabilities; and our ability to raise funds at reasonable rates to grow and expand our operations.
Our forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made and we do not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date of the statement as a result of new information or future events or developments. If we do update or correct one or more of these statements, investors and others should not conclude that we will make additional updates or corrections. For a further description of these and other risks, see "Risk Factors" included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019 and our subsequent reports on Form 10-Q and Form 8-K.
