Fourth quarter operating income was $28 million, down $2 million from a year ago due to higher raw material costs across the region partially offset by price mix.
Full-year operating income was $99 million, down $17 million from a year ago. The decrease was due to higher raw material costs and unfavorable foreign exchange impacts, driven primarily by the Pakistan rupee, which was partially offset by improved price mix.
In September 2019, the Company increased the quarterly dividend to $0.63 per share from $0.625 per share, and paid dividends of $174 million in 2019.
Impact of our prior year share repurchase program, which was effective November 4, 2018, was a benefit of $0.04 per share in the fourth quarter and $0.41 per share for the full year.
The Company expects 2020 reported EPS in the range of $6.48-$7.10 compared to reported EPS of $6.13 in 2019, and adjusted EPS to be in the range of $6.60-$7.20 compared to adjusted EPS of $6.65 in the prior year. This expectation excludes acquisition-related, integration and restructuring costs, as well as any potential impairment costs. Compared with last year, the 2020 full-year outlook assumes: North America operating income increases driven by favorable price mix; South America operating income increases driven by improved price mix and higher volumes; Asia-Pacific and EMEA operating incomes are expected to modestly increase driven by higher volumes and improved price mix; an adjusted effective tax rate range of approximately 26.0-27.0 percent; and continued mid to high single digit specialty ingredients net sales growth.
Cash from operations in 2020 is expected to be in the range of $640 million to $710 million. Committed capital investments are anticipated to be between $285 million to $305 million.
Ingredion will conduct a conference call today at 9 a.m. ET (8 a.m. CT) hosted by Jim Zallie, The call will be webcast in real time and will include a visual presentation accessible through the Ingredion website at https://ir.ingredionincorporated.com/ , in the "Events and Presentations" section, under "News and Events.” The presentation will be available to download a few hours prior to the start of the call. A replay of the webcast will be available for a limited time at https://ir.ingredionincorporated.com/ .
Jim Zallie, president and chief executive officer; James Gray, executive vice president and chief financial officer; and Jorgen Kokke, executive vice president, global specialties, will participate in the Consumer Analyst Group of New York (CAGNY) conference on Tuesday, February 18, 2020 at 3 p.m. ET in Boca Raton, Florida. The presentation will be available on the Company’s website,
https://ir.ingredionincorporated.com/ , in the "Events and Presentations" section, under "News and Events.”
Ingredion Incorporated (NYSE: INGR) headquartered in the suburbs of Chicago, is a leading global ingredient solutions provider serving customers in more than 120 countries. With annual net sales over $6 billion, the Company turns grains, fruits, vegetables and other plant-based materials into value-added ingredients solutions for the food, beverage, animal nutrition, brewing and industrial markets. With Ingredion Idea Labs® innovation centers around the world and more than 11,000 employees, the Company co-creates with customers and fulfills its purpose of bringing together the potential of people, nature and technology to create ingredient solutions that make life better. Visit ingredion.com for more information and the latest Company news.
This news release contains or may contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The Company intends these forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for such statements.
Forward-looking statements include, among others, any statements regarding the Company's prospects or future financial condition, earnings, revenues, tax rates, capital expenditures, cash flows, expenses or other financial items, including the Company's expectations regarding 2020 reported and adjusted EPS, 2020 operating income, 2020 adjusted effective tax rate, 2020 cash from operations, and 2020 committed capital investments; any statements concerning the Company's prospects or future operations, including management's plans or strategies and objectives therefor; and any assumptions, expectations or beliefs underlying the foregoing.
These statements can sometimes be identified by the use of forward looking words such as "may," "will," "should," "anticipate," "assume," "believe," "plan," "project," "estimate," "expect," "intend," "continue," "pro forma," "forecast," "outlook," "propels," "opportunities," "potential," "provisional," or other similar expressions or the negative thereof. All statements other than statements of historical facts in this release or referred to in this release are "forward-looking statements."
These statements are based on current circumstances or expectations, but are subject to certain inherent risks and uncertainties, many of which are difficult to predict and are beyond our control. Although we believe our expectations reflected in these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, investors are cautioned that no assurance can be given that our expectations will prove correct.
Actual results and developments may differ materially from the expectations expressed in or implied by these statements, based on various factors, including changing consumption preferences including those relating to high fructose corn syrup; the effects of global economic conditions and the general political, economic, business, market conditions that affect customers and consumers in the various geographic regions and countries in which we buy our raw materials or manufacture or sell our products, including, particularly, economic, currency and political conditions in South America and economic and political conditions in Europe, and the impact these factors may have on our sales volumes, the pricing of our products and our ability to collect our receivables from customers; future financial performance of major industries which we serve and from which we derive a significant portion of our sales, including, without limitation, the food, beverage, paper and corrugated, and brewing industries; the uncertainty of acceptance of products developed through genetic modification and biotechnology; our ability to develop or acquire new products and services at rates or of qualities sufficient to meet expectations; changes in government policy, law or regulations and costs of legal compliance, including with respect to environmental compliance; increased competitive and/or customer pressure in the corn-refining industry and related industries, including with respect to the markets and prices for our primary products and our co-products, particularly corn oil; the availability of raw materials, including potato starch, tapioca, gum Arabic and the specific varieties of corn upon which some of our products are based our ability to pass along potential increases in the cost of corn or other raw materials to customers; energy costs and availability, including energy issues in Pakistan; our ability to contain costs, achieve budgets and to realize expected synergies, including with respect to our ability to complete planned maintenance and investment projects on time and on budget, achieving expected savings under our Cost Smart program as well as with respect to freight and shipping costs; the behavior of financial and capital markets, including with respect to foreign currency fluctuations, fluctuations in interest and exchange rates and market volatility and the associated risks of hedging against such fluctuations; our ability to successfully identify and complete acquisitions or strategic alliances on favorable terms as well as our ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses or implement and maintain strategic alliances and achieve anticipated synergies with respect to all of the foregoing; operating difficulties, including with respect to information technology systems, processes and sites as well as boiler reliability; our ability to maintain satisfactory labor relations; the impact that weather, natural disasters, war or similar acts of hostility, acts and threats of terrorism, the outbreak or continuation of pandemics and other significant events could have on our business; tariffs, quotas, duties, taxes and income tax rates, particularly United States tax reform enacted in 2017; and our ability to raise funds at reasonable rates.
Our forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made and we do not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date of the statement as a result of new information or future events or developments. If we do update or correct one or more of these statements, investors and others should not conclude that we will make additional updates or corrections. For a further description of these and other risks, see "Risk Factors" included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018 and our subsequent reports on Form 10-Q and Form 8-K.
