Iowa corn planting races ahead, USDA Crop Progress Report says
U.S. corn pace is ahead of five-year average.
INDIANOLA, Iowa — The U.S. corn planting pace is slightly ahead of the five-year pace.
On Monday, the USDA released its Cop Progress Report that includes planting and emergence ratings.
U.S. farmers have 27% of the corn crop in the ground, ahead of a five-year average of 22%.
Individual states such as Minnesota and Iowa have 40% and 39% planted, respectively.
Illinois farmers have 37% of their corn planted vs. a 31% five-year average.
Meanwhile, 35 of the nation’s corn has emerged vs. a 4% five-year average.
USDA rated the nation’s soybean planting completion rate at 8% vs. a 4% five-year average.
Both Illinois and Indiana have 18% and 11% planted, respectively.
In its report Monday, the USDA rated the U.S. winter wheat crop as 54% good/excellent, lower than 57% a week ago. Also, 21% of the crop is headed, below the 25% five-year average.
Crop progress and condition estimates are based on survey data collected each week from early April through the end of November, according to the USDA report.
“The nonprobability crop progress and condition surveys include input from approximately 3,600 respondents whose occupations provide them opportunities to make visual observations and frequently bring them in contact with farmers in their counties. Based on standard definitions, these respondents subjectively estimate the progress of crops through various stages of development, as well as the progress of producer activities. They also provide subjective evaluations of crop conditions,” the USDA stated in its Monday report.
Most respondents complete their questionnaires on Friday or early Monday morning and submit them to the National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) field offices in their states by mail, telephone, fax, email, or through a secured internet website. A small number of reports are completed on Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday, according to the USDA report.
