To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web
Lockdown + the prospect of going viral = tomfoolery at its finest.
Case in point – Jason Derulo, who seemingly took a power drill to his teeth for the lols.
The Talk Dirty singer has racked up 16.7 million views on a TikTok video which sees him trying to eat corn on the cob from a spinning drill – which, we cannot stress enough, is a terrible idea and should not be attempted.
The 30-year-old held the corn affixed to a drill bit and told his followers: ‘Hey, have y’all seen this? I’ve always wanted to try it. Life hack.’
Jason proceeded to eat the corn from the rotating drill, before letting out a yelp – and opening his mouth to reveal he’d broken his two front teeth in half.
The star later shared another video of him showing his dental disaster to girlfriend Jena Frumes , lisping: ‘For real, how much do you think it’s gonna fix?
Nope, can’t see any flaws in this plan (Picture: Jason Derulo/TikTok)
Jason seemed to chip his teeth (Picture: Jason Derulo/TikTok)
‘I know it’s f***ing ugly. It’s f***ing despicable.’
And celeb dentist Dr Ben Winters, aka The Bentist, commented with exasperation: ‘How many times we gotta go through this bro.’
While the clip was pretty brutal, Jason’s followers are pretty convinced it is just a well edited prank.
Countless comments called the popstar ‘Jathon Derulo’, while one person wrote: ‘I need your editor’ and another comment read: ‘Can’t get any cornier than this.’
Sure enough, in Jason’s next few videos, he had a perfect set of gleaming white teeth, and when pictured out and about in Los Angeles hours after posting the prank, his front teeth were quite clearly intact.
The damage was pretty bad (Picture: Jason Derulo/TikTok)
Don’t worry, his pearly whites are just fine (Credits: SplashNews.com)
This isn’t even the first time Jason has ‘lost a tooth’ on TikTok, after he seemingly cracked his gnashers after falling into his swimming pool while attempting a handstand.
All the pranks have worked though, with the Cats star now having over 20 million followers on TikTok.
