Timely planting is key. Still, don’t give up on late-planted corn.
If the biblical character Job ever had any modern-day counterparts, they likely farmed in states like Indiana during the spring of 2019.
As in Job’s case, nothing went right last spring. Rain, rain, and more rain plagued many Indiana farmers last spring. “Planting progress was the third latest in the past 40 years,” says Bob Nielsen, Purdue University Extension agronomist. Nielsen discussed the 2019 growing season at this month’s Top Farmer Conference at Purdue University.
Other ominous 2019 factors included:
Just one half of the corn was planted by June 5.
Silking and grain maturity were among the third-latest in 40 years.
Season-long crop conditions rates were the fourth-worst in 34 years.
Grain harvest was the fifth-latest in 40 years.
Concerns mounted that last fall would be a repeat of 2009’s harvest from hell. “That year, we had that terrible September and October that ran into December,” Nielsen says. “It took forever to get the corn out.”
Some Indiana farmers gave up on planting altogether in 2019. “We had a record number of prevented planted acres,” says Nielsen. “Nearly 710,000 acres were not planted.” Matters didn’t improve in states like North Dakota, where just 48% of corn acres had been harvested by December 31, according to USDA.
Surprisingly, though, things turned out pretty well for Indiana corn farmers.
“We were looking at 150 (average) bushel (per acre) yields,” Nielsen says. Yet, the (average) 169-bushel-per-acre yields (that resulted in Indiana) were just 2.5% below the trend line yield of 173.4 bushels per acre. Late planting, by itself, doesn’t guarantee disastrously low yields.
Several reasons exist for the Indiana turnaround, says Nielsen. They include:
Modern hybrids. “This year reinforced that today’s hybrids are remarkably resilient compared with hybrids of 20 to 30 years ago,” says Nielsen.
Rainfall during grain fill. This helped hybrids to bounce back in realizing yield potential.
It wasn’t all roses, though. Drying bills boom for late-maturing corn.
“Corn that matures in mid- to late October takes forever and a day to dry down,” says Nielsen.
“Soil compaction, resulting from tillage and planting on wet soils, is a gift that keeps on giving all season long,” says Nielsen.
So, what’s corn’s greatest agronomic challenge?
“Stress-proofing corn against normal weather,” says Nielsen. Lately, normal has been anything but normal. Nielsen defines normal this way: “An unpredictable number of unpredictable extreme weather events, each occurring unpredictably, with unpredictable severity.”
Work with their seed dealers to identify hybrids that can best tolerate stress in their fields. “This is not just focusing on yield potential but asking the hard questions of seed dealers to prove that this hybrid tolerates stress,” says Nielsen. “This can easily be a 30- to 40-bushel-per-acre decision based on the resiliency of a hybrid.”
Make sound agronomic decisions. “We’ve harped on this for years,” says Nielsen. “But in light of the ever-increasing climate variability, it’s even more crucial to make the best possible agronomic decision that you have control over.”
Identify and mitigate field-specific yield limiting factors.
“We simply have to do a good job with those things we can control in order to minimize stress on the crop,” says Nielsen. “If you can minimize the stress of the crop by the choices you make, hybrids will be more resilient to the unpredictable weather we have been having.”
