2. Wash and dry corn cobs, removing any husks or strings. Rub each corn cob all over with
softened butter, then sprinkle with salt and pepper.
3. Arrange the corn on a sheet pan lined with parchment paper or foil.
4. Bake 20 to 30 minutes, rotating the corn halfway through cooking.
5. Remove corn from oven and let rest at least 20 minutes.
6. When corn is cool, cut off kernels (this should produce about 3 cups of corn) and place in large bowl.
7. Combine with chopped cherry tomatoes, minced jalapeno, red onion, cilantro, lime juice, and salt and pepper, to taste. Enjoy one serving tonight, then store in a glass container in the fridge until ready to use during the week.
Other Foods to Meal Prep on Sunday:
Chicken breasts: When roasting the corn, you can also cook your protein for the week. Pat two boneless, skinless chicken breasts dry, then rub one generously with taco seasoning and the other with Greek seasoning. Bake for 20-30 minutes with the corn, until chicken registers 170F on an instant-read thermometer. Shred the taco-seasoned chicken, and thinly slice the Greek-seasoned chicken breast. Store each separately in the fridge to use later in the week.
How To Use Your Corn Salsa in Five Different Dinners:
Your corn salsa becomes the main in this delicious dish inspired by elote, grilled Mexican street corn traditionally topped with mayo, crema, chili powder, and cheese. Just take a serving of your corn salsa and add in some Greek yogurt, crumbled cotija cheese, and sliced scallion. Then wash two to three leaves of Bibb lettuce and gently dry them. Divide the corn salsa mixture and half of the taco-seasoned shredded chicken between the cups, then top with pickled red onion if you have any. Slice an English cucumber into little sticks and sprinkle with salt for a healthy side.
Use a serving of leftover corn salsa and a serving of shredded chicken (beans work well here, if you don’t eat meat) as a hearty filling for quesadillas. Make them by layering the corn salsa, remaining shredded chicken (or drained canned beans), and your favorite cheese between two tortillas. Cooking your quesadilla the stove on medium-high heat for two to three minutes per side, until the cheese starts to melt. Pair it with a simple side salad (chopping up some leftover elote lettuce cups works perfectly, if you have any left over), to add some greens to your meal.
Savory and nutrient-rich, avocado toast is typically thought of as a morning meal, but it works just as well for an easy dinner, too. While a skillet heats over medium heat, combine a serving of corn salsa with a chopped-up scallion, a pinch of cotija cheese, a teaspoon of minced cilantro, four tablespoons of flour (or a gluten-free substitute ), one egg, and salt and pepper in a small bowl. Mix until combined. Spray the pre-heated skillet with cooking spray, then pour in the corn mixture to the center of the pan. (You can make one giant fritter or two smaller ones—up to you!) Cook for a few minutes on each side until browned and cooked through. Then mash an avocado in a small bowl with salt, pepper, lime juice, and minced cilantro, all to taste. Serve the corn fritter on a plate, and top with the mashed avocado. For extra protein, you can fry an egg in the same pan you use to make the fritter and slide it on top.
Cook a cup of couscous according to package directions, then toss with a splash of olive oil and juice from half a lemon. While the couscous cooks, take a serving of the corn salsa and mix in a quarter-cup diced cucumbers, a quarter teaspoon of oregano, and a tablespoon of capers or green olives. Serve half of the couscous and Greek-ified corn salsa in a bowl together, with half of the leftover roasted Greek seasoned chicken on top. (Save the remaining couscous in the fridge to use on Friday.)
Tabouleh is a fresh herb and grain salad commonly served in Lebanon and Syria—and it goes perfectly with corn salsa. Make a quick tzatziki sauce by mixing a tablespoon of finely grated cucumber with three tablespoons of Greek yogurt and a pinch of salt together in a small bowl. Then, toss your leftover couscous from last night with a half cup of finely chopped cilantro, minced cucumbers, drizzle of olive oil, one clove minced garlic, and the last of your corn salsa and chicken. Top with the tzatziki and pickled red onions (if you have any), and enjoy.
Did you make this corn salsa recipe and try any of these meals? Share how it turned out in Well+Good’s Cook With Us Facebook group!
