New crop tools maximize N efficiency in corn, soybeans, and other crops
A slew of new biological products promise increased crop yield by fixing atmospheric nitrogen.
One theme of the 2020 Commodity Classic Trade Show was the number of vendors offering products that turn atmospheric nitrogen into usabel nitrogen for crop use. These products are promised to boost crop yield, plus provide a more consistent and dependable nitrogen supply that isn’t lost due to leaching or volatilization.
We caught up with three companies and learned more about their products.
Research conducted in farmer fields and at land-grant universities throughout 2019 show that using Pivot Bio Proven improves corn yields about 6 bushels per acre, the company announced at a press conference.
The company’s Intent to Pivot large-scale, on-farm program reported a 5.8-bushel-per-acre advantage on fields using Pivot Bio Proven, compared with those with only synthetic nitrogen. University studies using PivotBio Proven demonstrated similar yield results and produced 6.0-bushel-per-acre benefits. The data covers more than 5 million data points, with a yield improvement shown 89% of the time, the company reports.
Pivot Bio Proven is a nitrogen-producing microbe applied in-furrow during planting, which adheres to roots of the corn plant, taking nitrogen from the air and turning it into ammonia, continually feeding nitrogen to the plant throughout the growing season, says Ernie Sanders, vice president of product development at Pivot Bio.
The microbes create a symbiotic relationship with the plant, delivering a reliable and consistent supply of nitrogen, the company says. At the full rate of 12.8 ounces per acre, Pivot Bio Proven delivers the equivalent of 25 pounds of synthetic nitrogen per acre, Sanders says. Some farmers reduce their commercial fertilizer rate 25 pounds; the company suggests keeping the normal rate and adding Pivot Bio Proven to improve nutrient efficiency.
“Our experience was very positive,” says Scott Henry, business development director of LongView Farms, near Ames, Iowa. Using Pivot Bio Proven bumped yield from 6 to 20 bushels per acre on 120 acres he tested in 2019. “It’s a great tool to add to the toolbox, to reduce our reliance on synthetic nitrogen,” Henry says. “We can use the microbiome to enhance yield and give us a more sustainable footprint. That is something we feel positive about.”
The suggested retail price of Pivot Bio Proven is $20 per acre. Find a dealer online at PivotBio.com .
Results are in from the 2019 growing season for Envita, an in-furrow biological product from Azotic, that helps leaves convert atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia, feeding the crop all season. Envita is applied in-furrow, at a rate of 3.2 ounces per acre. The bacteria – first discovered in sugarcane in 1988 – provides nitrogen to every cell in the plant, says Tom Tregunno, director of commercialization at Envita.
Farmers using Envita can reduce synthetic nitrogen needs up to 27% without yield loss. Or, use Envita in combination with the full fertilizer program. Trials in 2019 trials in Pottawatamie and Washington counties in Iowa in 2019 showed a 12- and 7-bushel-per-acre yield increase, respectively, over corn planted without Envita. North Dakota trials showed an 11.7-bushel-per-acre increase. The company touts an 80% “win” rate; 80% of the time yield improvement was shown using Envita.
Envita is recommended for use in corn, soybeans, wheat, and rice. Envita is available in all 50 states in 2020 through a dealer network, or online at Azotic’s website .
Source unlocks nutrients in the soil to be used by the plant, using “groundbreaking science to mimic natural plant-to-microbe signals that initiate atmospheric nitrogen fixation and phosphate solubilization nutrient cycling functions,” the company said in a statement. Ultimately, Source leads to increased plant health and improved yield, based on results of 60 trials with growers in 2019, and other small plot trials. Source increased corn yield by an average of 8.6 bushels per acre, with an 85% “win” rate.
Source uses a new active ingredient called maltol lactone, developed in-house. Simply, it’s science that “…stimulates the microbes already there to manufacture nitrogen and phosphorous fertilizer at the root zone,” says Travis Bayer, founder of Sound Agriculture. “We can get these microbes to work a lot harder.”
“It’s a very elegant solution,” says Diego Angelo, chief commercial officer for Sound Agriculture. “We use what’s in the soil, and have the microbes work harder for the plant.” Angelo adds that growers like Source because it comes in a jug, so it can be tank-mixed with other products. It also has a stable shelf life like other crop protection chemistries. Growers can apply Source between V-4 and V-T in corn, at the rate of 0.7 ounces per acre.
There is product available for 2020, but Angelo says the company is capping the amount of Source each farmer can use to allow as many growers to use it as possible. Farmers can go through the company’s dealer network, or check the Sound website for more information .
