Northern Corn Belt farmers face another prevented plant year, analyst says
Not everybody is seeing an early planted season.
The 2020 growing season has begun, and it looks like we’ll have an early planted corn and soybean crop. Just about everything else is later than normal in development.
Corn planting was almost complete by May 18 with soybeans over half done, which is early on both counts. However, almost everything else is late not only in planting but also development.
On Monday, the USDA’s Crop Progress Report showed corn planting 80% complete vs. 71% average (9% ahead of normal).
Soybean planting is 53% done vs. 38% average (15% ahead of normal), and cotton 44% planted vs. 40% normally done (4% ahead of average).
But almost everything else is on the late side – even winter wheat heading progress is behind normal. The most concerning area is North Dakota; this state is the furthest behind in the entire nation.
Other northern crops are finding planting a slow go, with HRS 60% planted vs. 80% average (20% behind normal), barley 72% planted vs. 82% average (10% behind), sorghum 32% planted vs. 34% average (2% behind), sugar beets 78% planted vs. 93% average (15% behind), and sunflowers 4% planted vs. 9% average (5% behind normal).
So, while corn and soybean planting is well ahead of average, northern crops are behind. Fortunately, northern areas are forecast to have dry and warm weather the next two weeks, which will allow planting to be more rapid. Unfortunately, only about 25% of the planting season is left, and growers have about 80% of ground left to plant in some northern areas.
So, it is inevitable there will be significant prevent plant in North Dakota and surrounding states. Weather forecasts are still somewhat wet for the Corn Belt the next week, with the wettest weather once again in the southern and eastern Corn Belt. The eight- to 14-day forecast dries a bit, though, and should allow soggy soils to dry out in that region.
News of China’s imposition this week of an 80.5% tariff on Australian barley is pressuring the grain markets somewhat. In fact, many Western countries have expressed dissatisfaction with China’s handling of the coronavirus crises.
That virus had a much more disastrous impact on Western economies than China, and they have been expressing that dissatisfaction directly to China including Australia and New Zealand.
Recently, the U.S. has taken a more aggressive stance towards China where the Covid19 originated, as well as a strong stance against the WHO (World Health Organization) which seemed to back China throughout this debacle.
The U.S. wrote a letter to WHO demanding an investigation of the communication between China and WHO from the onset of the Crises in December to now, claiming mismanagement by WHO and undue influence by China.  In it, the U.S. threatens to permanently withdraw U.S. backing of WHO unless a full investigation is made.  The full letter is posted on
Trump's twitter account and the accusations of mismanagement by WHO is striking in detail and scope.   Tensions between China and the U.S. seem tighter than before - making trade more difficult between nations.
On the positive side, the economic recovery/reopening of western countries, including the U.S., is proceeding at a rapid pace.  A few problem areas exists (mostly large city populations), but overall most of the country seems to be able to operate with little difficulty (especially rural counties/states).
Daily and weekly Covid19 cases continue to decline - even in areas making rapid recoveries.
Crude oil markets are especially excited about the recovery so far, rallying almost 100% in just a few short weeks on the July contract.  Stock values for energy producers has soared as well, with both ethanol and oil producers both seeing large increases in stock values. But they have a lot to recover from with the huge declines in March.
Ray is president of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc., a top-ranked marketing firm in the country.
This material has been prepared by a sales or trading employee or agent of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc. and is, or is in the nature of, a solicitation. This material is not a research report prepared by Progressive Ag Marketing's Research Department. By accepting this communication, you agree that you are an experienced user of the futures markets, capable of making independent trading decisions, and agree that you are not, and will not, rely solely on this communication in making trading decisions.
DISTRIBUTION IN SOME JURISDICTIONS MAY BE PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED BY LAW. PERSONS IN POSSESSION OF THIS COMMUNICATION INDIRECTLY SHOULD INFORM THEMSELVES ABOUT AND OBSERVE ANY SUCH PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTIONS. TO THE EXTENT THAT YOU HAVE RECEIVED THIS COMMUNICATION INDIRECTLY AND SOLICITATIONS ARE PROHIBITED IN YOUR JURISDICTION WITHOUT REGISTRATION, THE MARKET COMMENTARY IN THIS COMMUNICATION SHOULD NOT BE CONSIDERED A SOLICITATION.
The risk of loss in trading futures and/or options is substantial and each investor and/or trader must consider whether this is a suitable investment. Past performance, whether actual or indicated by simulated historical tests of strategies, is not indicative of future results. Trading advice is based on information taken from trades and statistical services and other sources that Progressive Ag Marketing believes are reliable. We do not guarantee that such information is accurate or complete and it should not be relied upon as such. Trading advice reflects our good faith judgment at a specific time and is subject to change without notice. There is no guarantee that advice we give will result in profitable trades.
