Organic Corn Prices Break Below the $8 Level; Poised to Test 2016 Lows
Organic corn prices mid-west picked up at the farm have dropped below $8 per bushel level. Prices for spot loads are trading near $7.75, as farmers are clearing out their bins ahead of the planting season. There appears to be a concerted effort in the mid-west to purge spot organic corn, and consumers are lower their bids.
Merchandisers have quoted prices in the South-Central PA region at $10.65 per bushel for Q4, and with approximately a $2.5 freight and loading charge to reach the mid-west, Q4 prices should be trading near $8.15 for the Q4. Organic corn prices are poised to test support near the 2016 lows at $7.40.
There is a combination of issues that are dragging on prices. First, most consumers are covered for the balance of Q1 and Q2 fo 2020. There is plenty of corn around, in bins, looking for a home. Additionally, a decent quantity of the organic corn this year has a test weigh below 54. While some merchandisers will accept organic feed corn #2 at a 52-test weight with a discount (of approximately 5 cents per pound), others are rejecting the corn which is creating additional headwinds for prices.
There also appears to be strong demand for organic corn with test weights that would place it at #1, which is 56 and above. The Jacobsen has heard that there is a robust premium for #1 organic corn which could be up to $1 per bushel. This would be used to mix with lower test weight corn to achieve 54 test weight.
There is also an accelerating number of farmers concerned that there could be too much precipitation again in 2020. Their concern stems from a recent report from the National Weather Service who is warning there is a high risk of flooding again this spring in the mid-west especially in areas that are still saturated. Additionally, farmers are concerned that levee fixes will not take place expeditiously, which will buoy insurance premiums for affected areas.
Discover what's moving the markets. Sign up for a daily update delivered to your inbox
This Section / Page contains links to the 3rd party websites of our top partners from whom we may receive compensation.
The content provided on the website includes general news and publications, our personal analysis and opinions, and contents provided by third parties, which are intended for educational and research purposes only. It does not constitute, and should not be read as, any recommendation or advice to take any action whatsoever, including to make any investment or buy any product. When making any financial decision, you should perform your own due diligence checks, apply your own discretion and consult your competent advisors. The content of the website is not personally directed to you, and we does not take into account your financial situation or needs.The information contained in this website is not necessarily provided in real-time nor is it necessarily accurate. Prices provided herein may be provided by market makers and not by exchanges.Any trading or other financial decision you make shall be at your full responsibility, and you must not rely on any information provided through the website. FX Empire does not provide any warranty regarding any of the information contained in the website, and shall bear no responsibility for any trading losses you might incur as a result of using any information contained in the website.The website may include advertisements and other promotional contents, and FX Empire may receive compensation from third parties in connection with the content. FX Empire does not endorse any third party or recommends using any third party's services, and does not assume responsibility for your use of any such third party's website or services.FX Empire and its employees, officers, subsidiaries and associates, are not liable nor shall they be held liable for any loss or damage resulting from your use of the website or reliance on the information provided on this website.
This website includes information about cryptocurrencies, contracts for difference (CFDs) and other financial instruments, and about brokers, exchanges and other entities trading in such instruments. Both cryptocurrencies and CFDs are complex instruments and come with a high risk of losing money. You should carefully consider whether you understand how these instruments work and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing your money.FX Empire encourages you to perform your own research before making any investment decision, and to avoid investing in any financial instrument which you do not fully understand how it works and what are the risks involved.
This site uses cookies to personalize content and to make it easier to use. We also share some information with third parties for advertising & analytics. By continuing to use this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more or to turn cookies off, please read our Privacy Policy And Cookie Policy
