As you look through the seed catalogs, you may noticed there are almost as many varieties of sweet corn as there are varieties of tomatoes, and that's a lot. by Peter Sutter, For the News Tribune May. 3 2020 @ 12:05am
As you look through the seed catalogs, you may noticed there are almost as many varieties of sweet corn as there are varieties of tomatoes, and that's a lot.
There is really only one way to get the full flavor and sweetness of sweet corn, and that is to grow it yourself because it starts to lose its sweetness shortly after it's picked. I am a big fan of fresh sweet corn, and I am talking about putting the water on to boil on the way out the door to pick it.
That being said, sweet corn also takes up a lot of space in the garden, but if you can spare the room, I think it is worth it.
The choice of which varieties to grow depends on personal preferences. First, you have to decide if you want yellow, white or bicolor (white and yellow on the cob). Then, there are different classes of sweetness. The original standard or sugary type is called Su or Su-1 with 8-18 percent sugar. Today, this type of sweet corn is used mainly for processing.
Next on the sweetness scale is the Sugar-Enhanced (SE). This sweet corn has a tender kernel and higher sugar content. SE sweet corn can be either heterozygous, sometimes called HSE (20-25 percent sugar) or homozygous with 30-40 percent sugar.
Then, there is the supersweet or "ultra/extra sweet" SH2 with 45-55 percent sugar, which boasts a longer shelf life which means the conversion of sugar to starch is significantly reduced.
This may sound kind of complicated, but this is what I suggest: Pick a color and sweetness and grow it. If you like it, grow it again next year. If you feel adventurous, try another one.
If you plant more than one variety during the same season, you will need to be careful they do not cross pollinate. You can do this by separating the different varieties by about 150 feet, depending on the wind in your area, or by planting one variety so it matures about two to three weeks later. The later method a little easier for the home gardener to accomplish.
There are a few other things to consider if the above hasn't baffled you; one is the stalk. I plant Kandy Korn every year as my main sweet corn because I like my corn yellow. I also like the taste, sweetness level and tenderness of the kernels.
I also like the tall stalks, as they can grow up to 8 feet tall. I like the look of that tall stalk, and it puts the ears of corn at just the right picking level without a lot of bending over. Those are all just personal preferences developed as I grew different varieties.
One problem I have had with the Kandy Korn and its tall stalks is they will blow over in a strong wind. Most of the time, it will stand back up, but there have been a few times I have to harvest it off the ground. That's not fun.
The last couple of years, I have planted IOCHIEF, which is supposed to have a better root system and stay up better. It did way better. It is also a SU variety. I was looking for a variety with less sugar to use in a gumbo recipe, so I am going to try that variety again this year. I am also going to try Illini Extra Sweet, as it is supposed to have a root system similar to IOCHIEF and have the sweetness and tenderness of the newer varieties. I will let you know how that turns out.
I have tried one or two of the supersweet or SH2 varieties, but they are a little too sweet for me and not quite as tender. With the SH2 varieties, you have to be very carful to isolate them as mentioned above. If they get cross pollinated with SU or SE, they will be more like field corn than sweet corn. Of course, they are coming out with new varieties every year.
I hope with this information you will decide to make room for sweet corn in your garden this year. I will talk about planting and caring for your sweet corn crop in next week's article. Until then, you can decide which variety you would like to plant.
Peter Sutter is a lifelong gardening enthusiast and a participant in the MU Extension's Callaway County Master Gardener program. Gardening questions can be sent to ccmgardener@gmail.com.
COMMENTS - It looks like you're using Internet Explorer, which isn't compatible with our commenting system. You can join the discussion by using another browser, like Firefox or Google Chrome .
It looks like you're using Microsoft Edge. Our commenting system is more compatible with Firefox and Google Chrome .
