Though subsequently his routes to higher education and solid employment were obstructed by poverty and prejudice, Dunbar found early fame as a poet, and an enthusiastic readership. But the success had a bitter edge for him, and he complained to his friend, James Weldon Johnson: “I’ve got to write dialect poetry, It is the only way I can get them to listen to me.”
Dunbar thought his poetry fell into two categories – the “major” poetry in standard English, underestimated by his readers, and the “minor” dialect poems. His frustration is understandable, but that labelling shouldn’t distract contemporary readers from the quality and importance of his dialect writing. Dunbar is a pioneer in this respect. If we were to trace the story of dialect in anglophone literature from his period to the present day, we’d see how vital a part it has played in revitalising and energising the language of poetry. The use of the vernacular has helped shape many of our current criteria for strong, memorable writing.
As well as the poetic writer and the dialect speaker, there is a third voice in Dunbar, in which the “plantation idiom”, as early commentators called it, is ploughed back into verse written primarily in standard English. The Corn-Stalk Fiddle is a terrific example. The idiom is rich and varied. It’s not only that of the celebrating field hands. Dunbar uses the language of the dance call with great effect in his penultimate stanza. Throughout, the vernacular and poetic pair up and give energy and succinctness to this brilliantly realised square dance of a poem.
Especially effective is the vividly detailed account of the building of the corn-stalk fiddle . I wasn’t aware such fiddles existed, and, at a first reading, I wondered if that was an underlying message of the poem: for the celebrants, there was access to joy only through fantasy. This thought hovers in the third stanza, perhaps: “And the music’s flow never loud but low / Is the concert note of a fairy band.”
But the poem makes clear that the fiddle is a real, carefully made musical instrument. The solo work and the collective, communal activity are seamlessly brought together. But again, at the end, when sleep blurs the speaker’s happy memories into dreams, the note becomes less than earthbound. In fact, those dreams are a touch demonic: “And I dream till the very break of dawn / Of an impish dance on a red-hot griddle / To the screech and scrape of a corn-stalk fiddle.” We may imagine this refers to the punishment for pleasure sometimes believed to await us in the afterlife – though Dunbar wasn’t a conventionally religious poet. More likely, it’s a glance towards the hell on Earth endured most of the time by the plantation workers.
