"A few big players have also applied for import of maize in large volumes," said Babu.
Of the total 1 lakh tonne import of maize allowed by the government, the remaining 50,000 tonnes will be bought by another state agency Nafed.
Pune: India’s poultry industry is worried about delays in maize imports by the state trading agency MMTC NSE 1.18 % , which received a poor response overseas to its tender for buying 50,000 tonnes of the fowl feed.
Of the total 1 lakh tonne import of maize allowed by the government, the remaining 50,000 tonnes will be bought by another state agency Nafed , and the consignments are expected to land in about 3 weeks.
India has allowed imports of 1 lakh tonne of maize during 2019-20 under tariff rate quota ( TRQ ) system. Industry sources said that Nafed's imports were hassle-free and faster as the agency has an online tendering process, which is not the case with MMTC.
Although the area sown under maize in the kharif season is good, there are concerns about the crop size due to lingering risks from the fall army worm (FAW) pest and skewed rainfall.
"Due to shortfall in production of maize and also due to skewed import of maize, many small and medium poultry farmers in Karnataka and other states are in distress, thus affecting production of poultry,” said Akhilesh Babu, president, Karnataka Poultry Farmers and Breeders Association ( KPFBA ).
“MMTC has not received the expected response from global suppliers for the tender floated, thus adding to the stress levels of farmers.”
"A few big players have also applied for import of maize in large volumes. The KPFBA fears that the big players may get all the maize, leaving nothing for the small and medium poultry farmers,” said Babu, whose association wants centralised maize imports to be prioritised.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
