Chef Gloria Jordan of La Trattoria Cafe Napoli in Fort Myers shares some of her favorite recipes using ingredients found at Asian and Latin markets.
Forced to stay home due to COVID-19, many people are rediscovering their kitchen and cooking. Social media sites are full of home cooks and professional chefs posting videos and photos of what they are preparing in quarantine.
Gloria Jordan is one of them. Her south Fort Myers restaurant, La Trattoria Café Napoli , is open for take out; however, she has been cooking up a storm at home.
“I release my stress in the kitchen,” Jordan says. “It’s my escape, it’s my medicine.”
She puts together dishes designed for repurposing, turning one meal into several.
“I come from Cuba," she says, "and a home where we didn’t waste food."
When big grocers and retailers are running out of supplies, smaller, locally owned international markets are, for the most part, staying stocked and are a flavor treasure trove.
It’s those stores, outdoor markets and local farms where Jordan has been shopping. Using the ingredients found, she offers a few recipes to try at home.
Going back to her roots, she makes a pot roast.
“It’s so easy and the pressure cooker is magic, especially for people who don’t like to cook.”
The leftovers are perfect for tacos using fresh corn tortillas found at a Latin market.
Inspired at the Asian market, Jordan collected ingredients for a hearty soup substituting mung beans for lentils. It’s filling on its own or good alongside her mortadella sandwich, a nod to local Italian stores.
“Cali-style” is what she calls the meals she's assembled for us.
“California is a melting pot of cuisine especially with so much Mexican and Asian influences," she says.
"It makes me sad to see the recent discrimination against these groups.
“Cooking is about bringing flavors and cultures together. I mean we’re all in this together right?”
Melanage Savor and Sense Blends (substitute your favorite spice blend or make your own. These contain garlic, onion, red pepper, tomato, rosemary, thyme, white pepper)
