RecipeTin Eats x Good Food: Extra crispy corn fritters
RecipeTin Eats x Good Food: Crispy corn fritters
The trick is to use as little batter as possible - barely enough to hold the corn together.
There are a few foods I have very strong opinions about: Low fat coconut milk has no place in the kitchen. Cheese should be a food group. And fritters should always be very, very crispy.
I don't care what kind of fritter it is. Zucchini, carrot, prawn, broccoli, pea. Spicy, herby, cheesy. If you cook it so it's got a thick golden crust, I'll be reaching for one before the plate hits the table.
Three little things to transform sad soggy fritters into crisp golden wonders:
Crispy corn fritters with avocado cream.
Use as little batter as possible – barely enough to hold the corn together.
Switch out some of the flour for cornflour.
Add a good hit of parmesan.
Sweet pops of fresh corn on the inside, crispy on the outside. These fritters are light on batter, heavy on the corn – just the way they should be. This makes enough for a meal for two with a leafy green salad on the side, or a starter for four.
2 cups fresh corn kernels, raw (canned or frozen is fine, see note)
½ cup coriander leaves, roughly chopped (some stems are fine, too)
Get the latest news and updates emailed straight to your inbox.
Place flour, cornflour and bi-carb soda in a bowl, mix to combine.
Add corn, parmesan, spring onions and coriander. Mix until the corn kernels are evenly coated in batter.
Add enough oil to cover the base of a skillet or frypan and place over medium-high heat. Spray the underside of a spatula with oil spray (this prevents the batter from sticking when you flatten each fritter).
Place 1/4 cup of batter into skillet, then flatten, using the spatula, to 1cm thick. Repeat with 2 or 3 more fritters, but don't crowd the pan.
Cook for 3 minutes until deep golden and crisp, then flip and cook the other side for 2-3 minutes.
Transfer to a cooling rack set on a baking tray, and keep warm in a low oven. Repeat with remaining fritters.
Serve with sauce of choice for dunking.
For the crispiest fritters with the best flavour, you can't beat fresh corn. If using canned or frozen (thawed), dry the kernels as best you can, to ensure the fritters will be crispy.
Switch out the corn with 2 cups of chickpeas, rice, beans or peas.
Pro tip: Use an ice-cream scoop with a lever for easy handling of the batter.
For avocado sauce: puree 1 medium avocado with 1/4 cup sour cream, 2 tablespoons lime or lemon juice and 1/4 cup finely chopped coriander leaves. Season with salt and pepper to taste.
