Rochester's Corn Hill Arts Fest, Park Ave. Fest Canceled Due to Coronavirus
PUBLISHED 10:08 AM ET Apr. 08, 2020 PUBLISHED 10:08 AM EDT Apr. 08, 2020 UPDATED 1:48 PM ET Apr. 08, 2020
Rochester's Corn Hill Arts Festival and Park Avenue Summer Art Festival have both been canceled this year due to the coronavirus pandemic.
The announcement for the Corn Hill Arts Festival was sent out Wednesday Morning.
Festival organizers released this statement regarding the decision:
“For 51 years the Corn Hill Neighbors Association has come together to welcome artists from across the US and Canada to our Annual Arts Festival. Given the unprecedented global events due to COVID-19 and the concern for the safety and well-being of our greater community and the people who contribute to this event, the difficult decision has been made to cancel the Festival.”
“We would like to thank ESL Federal Credit Union, the more than 200 volunteers, our event sponsors and vendors and of course the 300-plus artists that work year-round to make our beloved neighborhood Festival possible. And while we are all deeply disappointed that this year’s event will not take place, we are already in discussion regarding the resurgence of the Festival in 2021.”
Because the festival will not take place this year, the Corn Hill Neighbors Association will be exploring ways to support the artists who rely on these types of events.
The decision to cancel the Park Avenue Summer Art Festival was announced Wednesday afternoon. The Parke Avenue Revitalization Committee says it made the decision after consulting with the City of Rochester and Monroe County Health Department.
The 2020 Park Avenue Summer Art Festival is now set for August 7 and 8 in 2021.
The Lilac Festival, which is normally held in May, has been placed on hiatus during the pandemic. Organizers say they hope to reschedule.
The CGI Rochester Jazz Festival has been postponed and will not take place during its usual month of June. Organizers hope to reschedule for the fall of this year.
