The dollar is weaker and crude oil drops below $20 per barrel.
INDIANOLA, Iowa -- On Friday, the CME Group’s farm markets close mostly higher.
At the close, the May corn futures closed 2½¢ higher at $3.22¼. July corn futures finished 3¢ higher at $3.29¼.
May soybean futures settled 4¼¢ lower at $8.32¾. July soybean futures ended 3½¢ lower at $8.42¼.
July wheat futures closed 3¾¢ higher at $5.33½.
July soymeal futures settled $3.00 per short ton lower at $293.10. July soy oil futures closed 0.01¢ higher at 26.67¢ per pound.
In the outside markets, the NYMEX crude oil market is $1.55 per barrel lower at $18.32, the U.S. dollar is lower, and the Dow Jones Industrials are 355 points higher.
On Friday, private exporters reported to the USDA export sales of 120,000 metric tons of soybeans for delivery to unknown destinations during the 2019/2020 marketing year.
The marketing year for soybeans began September 1.
Britt O’Connell, cash adviser for Commodity Risk Management Group, says that it’s a quiet news day and quiet on the trade front.
"Late yesterday, there was an announcement from Gilead Sciences that its experimental drug remdesivir has seen encouraging early data in treatment of COVID-19. While it was quick to point out this is far from a complete study, the optimism helped lift the stock market move higher overnight. This good news likely spilled over slightly into other markets,” O’Connell says.
She added, “Corn has had a historically poor week, trading to new contract lows vs. the May and challenging lows we haven’t seen since the fall of 2016, but holding support that was at the $3.18 mark. With old crop reaching a very oversold condition, decent exports as of late, we may just have enough of a story to catch a bit of a break.”
However, it is going to be very difficult to get excited about new-crop corn prices, she says.
“With projections of 97 ml acres – most since 2012 – and lackluster demand, stocks appear to be too burdensome. While we have yet to get an official look at 2020/21 expectations – will come May WASDE – the writing is on the wall,” she says.
The soybean market is really a tale of two extremes, according to O’Donnell.
“Domestic demand has been stellar, with crush plants setting record month over month.  Export demand has once again been the drag. With a very large SA crop, a cheap Brazilian real, and this being an unseasonal time for China to buy U.S. beans, the struggle continues.  While the 2020/21 balance sheet for beans appears somewhat friendly today, it does seem as if the talk about shifting more acres toward soybeans could gain more traction this year,” O’Connell says.
Al Kluis, Kluis Advisors, says the demand destruction in the corn market will keep a lid on rallies.
“We had a nice rally in the winter wheat market last week due to freezing temps forecast for the winter wheat states. However, since those cold temps, the wheat market has been selling off. It’s a classic case of buy the rumor, sell the fact. Corn and wheat saw some decent weekly export sales this week, but soybeans were pretty low. South America continues to export some grain to the rest of the world. Demand destruction is still happening. Until that stabilizes, expect upside to be limited,” Kluis told customers in a daily note.
Kluis added, “Once we get past the weather systems in the U.S. this week, next week we will see the corn planting pace start picking up across much of the U.S. The weather is expected to be warmer and drier for a while.”
On Thursday, the CME Group’s farm markets get pressured by a lack of bullish news.
At the close, May corn futures finished ½¢ higher at $3.19¾; July corn futures finished ½¢ lower at $3.26¼.
May soybean futures closed 5¼¢ lower at $8.36¾; July soybean futures ended 6¢ lower at $8.45¾.
July wheat futures closed 10¢ lower at $5.30½.
July soy meal futures settled 50¢ per short ton lower at $296.10. July soy oil futures closed 0.26¢ lower at 26.68¢ per pound.
In the outside markets, the NYMEX crude oil market is 3¢ per barrel lower at $19.78, the U.S. dollar is higher, and the Dow Jones Industrials are 57 points lower.
Jack Scoville, PRICE Futures Group, says today’s trade features pretty dull markets.
“Beans and wheat prices are hurt by less export sales, but corn is enjoying some short covering from the export sales and the meltdown yesterday. Corn should have very limited upside potential and this might be just a one-day affair. Planting should start next week around Chicago and soon enough farther north, but they have snow to melt yet. Planting should be starting up again in the Delta/U.S. Southeast after the big rains earlier this month,” Scoville says.
Jim Bower, Bower Trading, says investors are not nervous enough about any U.S. planting delays.
“Row-crop markets post new lows overnight amid macro headwinds. Plus, concern over faltering demand weighs on the markets and prospects that 2020 U.S. spring planting is “delayed but not shut down.” Ag markets looking for evidence of recovery in food demand. Sinking crude oil continues to be a major undertow for corn,” Bower told customers in a daily note.
Separately, the USDA’s Weekly Export Sales Report Thursday shows strong corn and wheat demand figures.
Corn: 968,500 metric tons (mt) vs. the trade’s expectations of between 800,000 and 1.6 mmt
On Wednesday, the CME Group’s farm markets trade weaker, with unfavorable outside markets.
At the close, May corn futures finished 6¾¢ lower at $3.19¼; July corn futures closed 5½¢ lower at $3.26¼.
May soybean futures settled 5¢ lower at $8.42; July soybean futures ended 3¾¢ lower at $8.51¾.
May wheat futures closed 8½¢ lower at $5.40¾.
July soy meal futures settled $3.50 per short ton higher at $296.60. May soy oil futures ended 0.19¢ lower at 26.55¢ per pound.
In the outside markets, the NYMEX crude oil market is 11¢ per barrel higher at $19.78, the U.S. dollar is higher, and the Dow Jones Industrials are 404 points lower.
Al Kluis, Kluis Advisors, says the ag markets are reacting to planting weather and the outside markets.
“Weather forecasts are being closely watched. Freezing temperatures are set to dip in the winter wheat area of the Southern Plains this week. Soybean meal set new contract lows on Tuesday. However, futures are showing early signs that we may have pushed prices low enough,” Kluis told customers in a daily note.
Kluis added, “Selling pressure in crude oil this morning has pushed prices to the lowest levels in nearly 20 years. If corn futures are able to hold tight to the recent lows, then it could signal the spring low is in place.”
On Tuesday, the CME Group’s farm markets show little momentum.
At the close, May corn futures finished 5½¢ lower at $3.26; July corn futures closed 4¢ lower at $3.32¼.
May soybean futures closed 7¾¢ lower at $8.47; July soybean futures finished 6¾¢ lower at $8.55¼.
May wheat futures ended 6½¢ lower at $5.48¾.
July soy meal futures closed $1.10 per short ton lower at $287.50. May soy oil futures ended 0.16¢ lower at 26.74¢ per pound.
In the outside markets, the NYMEX crude oil market is $1.84 per barrel lower, the U.S. dollar is lower, and the Dow Jones Industrials are 570 points higher.
Al Kluis, Kluis Advisors, says investors will be watching corn spreads and company earnings reports.
“The firming of the bull spreads in corn is a positive sign for the corn market,” Kluis told customers in a daily note.
Kluis added, “Companies are starting to release corporate earnings reports this week. How will the stock market react? Many firms will show an extreme drop in profits or even a quarterly loss. They are also likely to take yearly projections of their profits sharply lower, or offer no guidance going forward. As many firms release their negative projections over the next two weeks, can the stock market continue its amazing rebound?”
On Monday, the CME Group’s farm markets do not have the attention of investors.
At the close, May corn futures finished ¼¢ lower at $3.31¼; July corn futures ended ½¢ lower at $3.36½.
May soybean futures settled 9½¢ lower at $8.54¼; July soybean futures closed 8¼¢ lower at $8.62¼.
May wheat futures closed 1½¢ lower at $5.55.
July soy meal futures closed $3.30 per short ton lower at $294.50. May soy oil futures closed 0.51¢ lower at 26.90¢ per pound.
In the outside markets, the NYMEX crude oil market is 13¢ per barrel lower, the U.S. dollar is higher, and the Dow Jones Industrials are 299 points lower.
Al Kluis, Kluis Advisors, says investors are weighing the impacts on the grain markets regarding the global oil production deal announced Sunday.
“On Sunday afternoon, the OPEC-Plus group announced an agreement to cut daily global oil production by 9.7 million barrels,” Kluis told customers in a daily note. “What will happen with crude oil futures? The weekly crude oil chart showed an inside week last week. Taking out last week’s high would be a positive sign for energy and commodity prices. Taking out the low would be bearish for both.”
Kluis added, “The USDA reports on Thursday are a good step in getting the reduced ethanol demand factored into the corn market. Even with the negative report, corn prices closed higher, showing that the negative expectation was built into the current market price.”
