The United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), which ensures U.S. soy growers maintain robust access to two of their top markets, was implemented yesterday, July 1. ASA President Bill Gordon said of the announcement, “USMCA is a win for U.S. soybean farmers and the American economy, as it restores certainty and stability to two important export markets for our farmers and lays a foundation for future growth.” To get more information about the benefits of this agreement, read the full release here .
The Illinois Soybean Association (ISA) just launched a new Facebook page for Illinois Soybean Growers (ISG), a united membership group influencing key legislation that will help secure policies to enable Illinois Soybean farmers to be the most effective soybean producers. The page can be found here , and will feature the latest information for Illinois soy growers and serve as a resource to connect and converse with other members. Click here to sign up.
Are you properly supporting soybean nodulation development? CCA Soy Envoy Cody Pettit looks at nodulation and soybean nitrogen considerations in his most recent article. Read Pettit’s article and get the latest in-season, actionable advice at ILSoyAdvisor.com .
The 2020 Farm Progress Show and Huskers Harvest Day were cancelled this week. While show management had confirmed earlier that these events would continue with safety measures in place, in the best interest of its visitors, exhibitors and staff, they have since been cancelled, given the rapidly changing conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. For more information, visit Marketing.FarmProgress.com .
This week, we’re reading about cover crops in a recent Farm Progress article, “ Subsidize your step into cover crops .” The piece discusses how the Conservation Stewardship Program helps zero out the seed costs on an experimental 40 acres. Cover crops are one of five practices deployed through the Natural Resources Conservation Service cost-share program, which makes it easier for farmers to commit to more sustainable practices without losing money or having to worry about the results. Read more about the program and how farmers are liking it here .
The American Soybean Association (ASA) and Corteva Agriscience are seeking applicants for the 2021 Young Leader Program . This program is a two-phase educational program for those actively farming and passionate about the future of agriculture. Applications are now being accepted, so to learn more about the program and apply, click here .
In his U.S. Soy article, 2020 Ground Work: Excellent Growing Conditions in Illinois , Illinois Soybean farmer Elliott Uphoff shares his excitement over the field conditions heading into summer. Uphoff outlines his experience laying the ground work for this season and how this dry June has actually helped the soybeans planted root deeper than in past years. Read about Uphoff’s planting journey this season and why he thinks Illinois is on track for some great crops this year here .
China is ramping up U.S. soybean imports, but since COVID-19 is creating new obstacles, shipments could be affected. According to Bloomberg, China is requesting U.S. and Brazil soybean shippers to provide documentation to prove their shipments are free of the virus. The United Soybean Export Council (USSEC) has stated they are seeking clarification from Chinese authorities on how this applies to soybeans as compared to direct consumables. Read more about this issue here .
The American Soybean Association (ASA) is now accepting applications for the Conservation Legacy Awards, which recognize U.S. soybean farmers who use environmentally friendly and profitable farm management practices. Entries are judged on soil management, water management, input management, conservation, environmental management and sustainability. All soybean farmers are eligible to enter, so fill out an application today and visit www.soygrowers.com for more information.
Last week, the Trump Administration announced that the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) would be investing $86 million into rural broadband services across eight different states. The USDA is providing loans to six telecommunications providers to build, expand and improve broadband services in Alabama, Arkansas, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Tennessee, Texas and Wisconsin. To read more about the Telecommunications Infrastructure Loan and Loan Guarantee Program and the projects involved, click here .
Applications are now being accepted for those interested in serving on the American Soybean Association (ASA) Board of Directors. There are currently two director positions up for election. If you are interested in becoming a candidate, see here for eligibility requirements and complete the online application by the end of the day on Friday, July 17, 2020. Candidates will interview with the ISG Board of Directors during their July meeting and seating will take place in December during the ASA Board meeting. If you have questions, please contact Dustin Scott ( scottd@ilsoy.org ) at the Illinois Soybean Growers office.
The American Soybean Association (ASA) wrote a letter to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) this week to reject the pending retroactive small refinery exemption (SRE) petitions listed on the agency website. By doing so, ASA says the EPA will be standing with U.S. soybean growers in support of the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS). ASA said the petitions are a threat to the biodiesel industry and soy growers who rely on the certainty of the RFS to sell their soy oil to biodiesel producers. Read more about the letter and ASA’s response here .
The Illinois Soybean Board shared how the ISA checkoff program is hard at work for Illinois soybean farmers in their recent checkoff video . The video highlights how the checkoff program is reinvested to help Illinois soybean growers become the most knowledgeable, sustainable and profitable in the marketplace. If you missed it, check it out here .
Learn how progressive farmers manage their crops using plant growth regulators in the July 14 ILSoyAdvisor webinar. Presenters Dale Hanke and Ryan Miller from Stoller will discuss the yield-limiting effects of stress on soybeans and how proper nutrition and PGRs timed at critical crop stages can help farmers break through yield barriers. Learn more and register for the July 14 webinar online.
What will drive supply and demand for soybean and corn markets in the upcoming marketing year? Attend ISA’s Agribusiness Management Program (AMP) summer webinar series at 9 a.m. on July 22 to hear presenter Todd Hubbs, University of Illinois, discuss market fundamentals. Hubbs will also look at implications for marketing year average prices as well as the likely pattern of prices over the next year. Learn more about this session and register for the entire series at ILSoyAdvisor.com .
Some good news for soybeans this week with 71% of U.S. soybeans classified as good to excellent, 1% higher than a week ago. https://bit.ly/2YLevgL
See more tweets from @ILSoyAdvisor and “follow” along on Twitter.
