Florence Pugh is acknowledging her white privilege and times she appropriated others' cultures.
The actress, known for her roles in "Little Women" and "Lady Macbeth," took to Instagram on Friday to reflect on and apologize for things she's done, such as wearing her hair in corn rows and braids.
"I'm truly sorry to all of you that were offended for years or even just recently," she wrote.
"These last four weeks have been huge. The world is trying to make change and I'm learning a tidal wave of information that frankly, was always there but I wasn't aware of."
She noted that she's tried her best to use her platform to pass on what she's learned to others and to elevate the voices of others – but that doesn't mean that she hasn't made mistakes in the past.
The 24-year-old took her followers back to when she was 18 and first learned what the term "cultural appropriation" meant. She had worn her hair braided into corn rows, a style that she wrote was trending on red carpets at the time. Pugh said she was shocked when a friend of hers explained why it was wrong.
"She began to explain to me what cultural appropriation was, the history and heartbreak over how when Black girls do it they're mocked and judged, but when white girls do it, it's only then perceived as cool," Pugh wrote.
"It was true," she continued. "I could see how Black culture was being so obviously exploited. I was defensive and confused, white fragility coming out, plain and simple."
She delved into another example.
When Pugh was 8, she became close with an Indian shop owner in Oxford. "She was excited to share her culture and I was excited to learn," Pugh wrote, noting that the woman would gift her items, teaching her how to use Kohl, where to place a Bindi and about henna, which Pugh said she became obsessed with for years to come and it eventually became trendy.
"No one cared about the origin," she wrote, explaining that since she had been taught about the culture, she hadn't thought she was doing anything wrong. But she now realizes she was culturally appropriating, too.
"I actually wasn't being respectful in how I was using it," she explained. "I wore this culture on my terms only."
She made the same mistake when she was 17, she said, when she posted a photo of herself wearing braids and a beanie painted with a Jamaican flag.
"Stupid doesn't even cut it," she wrote. "I was uneducated. I was unread."
Pugh continued on to apologize.
"I cannot dismiss the actions I bought into years ago, but I believe that we who were blind to such things must acknowledge them and recognize them as our faults, our ignorance and our white privilege and I apologize profusely that it took this long," she wrote.
"To see change I must be change," she captioned the post.
