Catlin Ball and Brandon Lovett take advantage of a break in the rain Tuesday afternoon to weed the corn crops at Slainte Farm in Devola.
Despite a colder than normal spring, lovers of fresh sweet corn will soon be able to pick up ears at local farmers markets.
“Our first plant of corn, the ground was so cold it took awhile to get going,” said Daniel Worthington of Worthington Produce.
He said the second planting has caught up to the first round of corn.
“So far, it’s looking good,” he added. “The cold weather is what slowed it down the most.”
Tom Witten, owner of Witten Farms, explained the rain didn’t adversely affect the corn crops this year.
“Sweet corn mostly likes it wet and it likes the warmer temperatures, but really nothing over 85 (degrees),” he said. “Corn really likes moisture and it doesn’t have any problems like tomatoes.”
He said Witten corn will be at their markets starting Friday, although it’s been one of the more difficult springs he can recall.
“We had some hard freezes and it took its toll on some of the corn fields,” he said. “It was a pretty dang cold April.”
Catlin Ball, owner of Slainte Farm in Devola, said his corn crops didn’t do much for a long time.
“We’ve had a pretty rough year with everything we do,” he said. “Our corn is probably two feet tall. Last year, it was three to three and a half feet tall by this time.”
He said the sweet corn for his River Road market will be ready by mid- to late July.
“It’s starting to take off now,” Ball added.
Witten almost always start planting on April 1 and won’t stop until about Aug. 1. They pick from one field from 5 to 7 days before they move to the next field. Witten said they just planted Labor Day corn on Tuesday and there will be four more plantings this summer.
“It will keep the markets in corn until September,” he explained. “We try to have sweet corn fresh for 90 to 100 days.”
He said they try to keep their corn as fresh as possible by starting to pick it at 3 a.m. so it will be in the markets by 8 a.m.
“We’re running about seven days later than the five-year average,” Witten noted.
Michele Newbanks can be reached at mnewbanks@mariettatimes.com.
• Multiple nights of freezing weather affected this year’s sweet corn crops.
• Fresh sweet corn will start hitting farmers markets as early as Friday.
• Although Washington County has seen a lot of rain, the wet weather doesn’t adversely affect the corn crops.
• Sweet corn is planted as early as the first of April.
