NORMAL — An Uptown Normal festival known for sweet corn, circus performances and welcoming Illinois State University students back to the Twin Cities has been canceled as a result of the uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 virus.
The Town of Normal said it would cancel the Sweet Corn Circus and all other public performances scheduled through August in Uptown Normal.
The 2020 event was to mark a new partnership with Maddox Sweet Corn, boiling more than 12 tons of corn via a vintage steam engine.
Previously known as the Sweet Corn Blues Festival , the event got a new focus and the name in 2019 as officials aimed to celebrate the agricultural and circus roots of Bloomington-Normal.
Spreading across Uptown Normal, the Sweet Corn Circus traditionally welcomes ISU students to the area while also entertaining community members through a combination of live performances, sidewalk sales, crafts and flea market vendors. In past years, ISU's Gamma Phi Circus has performed and corn-eating contests have drawn big crowds.
More than 17 tons of fresh-picked sweet corn is sold at the festival. That comes out to more than 50,000 ears.
Bloomington Kiwanis Club member Katie Klein serves corn Saturday, Aug. 24, 2019, during the Sweet Corn Circus in uptown Normal.
Volunteers shuck corn Saturday, Aug. 24, 2019, during the Sweet Corn Circus in uptown Normal.
Russ Hany, left, juggles with Illinois State University junior Zackary Martin, an accounting major from Saint Rose, Ill., on Saturday, Aug. 24, 2019, during the Sweet Corn Circus in uptown Normal. The event resumes at 11 a.m. Sunday.
Patrons grab utensils for their corn Saturday, Aug. 24, 2019, during the Sweet Corn Circus in uptown Normal.
A visitor to the Sweet Corn Circus dresses for the event Saturday, Aug. 24, 2019, during the Sweet Corn Circus in uptown Normal.
A youngster digs into an ear of corn Saturday, Aug. 24, 2019, during the Sweet Corn Circus in uptown Normal.
Illinois State University senior Jeremy Cifonie of Naperville rides a unicycle through uptown Normal on Saturday, Aug. 24, 2019, during the Sweet Corn Circus.
Bloomington Kiwanis Club member Jill Hutchison serves corn Saturday, Aug. 24, 2019, during the Sweet Corn Circus in uptown Normal.
The love of corn was to be found Saturday, Aug. 24, 2019, during the Sweet Corn Circus in uptown Normal.
