It's corn season, and Here & Now resident chef Kathy Gunst celebrates with recipes for a corn and potato curry, a corn, tomato, and basil tart, and corn and chicken tacos.
Many cooks have tricks for the best way to remove the kernels from a cob of corn. I like to keep it simple: place the shucked ear of corn in the middle of large bowl. Holding the cob with one hand, and working with a sharp knife, I cut down the cob removing the kernels and the milk (the white liquid) that is just beneath the kernels. Then I flip the cob over and get any remaining kernels from the other side. Keep the cobs for making corn stocks; see the curry recipe for more.
The corn adds a deep sweetness to this simple curry. The turmeric adds a gorgeous yellow/saffron color and the potatoes become buttery in the coconut milk and ginger broth. You can serve the curry as is or over a bowl of steamed jasmine or basmati rice.
1 large potato or 6 baby potatoes, peeled or peel on, cut into 1-inch pieces
Place the cobs in a large pot with the potatoes and 3 cups water. Add a generous amount of salt and pepper. Bring to a boil over high heat, reduce the heat and partially cover until the potatoes are tender and the water tastes sweet and slightly corn-like, about 15 to 20 minutes. Remove the potatoes with a slotted spoon and let cool. Strain the corn stock and discard the cobs. You will only be using 1 cup of the corn stock; the rest can be kept covered in the refrigerator for up to 5 days or frozen for several months.
In a large skillet heat the oil over low heat. Add the onion, salt and pepper and cook, stirring, for 8 minutes. Add the ginger and the turmeric and cook another 2 minutes. Stir the potatoes into the mixture. Raise the heat to moderately high, stir in the corn and then add the coconut milk and 1 cup of the corn stock. Bring to a boil, reduce the heat to low and simmer uncovered for 5 minutes until slightly thickened. Add hot sauce to taste, salt and pepper if needed, and sprinkle with the cilantro. Serve hot.
You can use a pre-made pastry shell to save time or make this buttery herb-flecked pastry a night ahead of time. The filling — fresh shucked corn, tomatoes, basil and Parmesan — is creamy and filling enough to make this tart a main course. Serve with a mixed greens.
