The market is incentivizing farmers to plant fewer soybeans, analyst says
Soybean prices have dropped 78¢ in January.
Grain markets have had a tough time the past few weeks, with soybeans dropping nearly 80¢ recently after supposedly bullish news of the Chinese-U.S. trade phase one deal.
That has dragged corn and wheat prices lower, although they have not performed as badly as the soybean market.
For example, soybean prices since January 2 have dropped 73¢ on the March contract, to January 28, with corn down only 7¢ and CBOT wheat actually up 12¢ in that time frame. While soybean prices have tanked, wheat prices have actually run higher.
That is providing incentive for farmers this winter to remove soybeans from the planting mix even more, substituting instead spring wheat and corn.
But how long can this go on, as we already had 13 million less acres of soybeans planted in 2019 while corn acres actually rose 600,000 acres. If China wants to buy soybeans from the U.S., this is not the way to get U.S. farmers to grow it.
Recently, the stock markets have acted more like soybeans lately, as if the world would soon end as stocks dropped 450 points in the Dow on concerns the coronavirus would have great impacts on the world.  However, most of the 4,500 infections worldwide and 106 deaths are in one province of China.
So, it seems like perhaps the end of the world might be a bit premature? After a horrific week last week and to start the week Monday, calmer heads seem to be prevailing, but the stock market did lose all its gains so far this year.
In positive news for agriculture, the WOTUS (Waters of the U.S.) rule was clarified by the administration in a more favorable light to agriculture. Quoting from the EPA news release last week:
“The Navigable Waters Protection Rule ends decades of uncertainty over where federal jurisdiction begins and ends. For the first time, EPA and the Army are recognizing the difference between federally protected wetlands and state protected wetlands. It adheres to the statutory limits of the agencies’ authority.”
In other ag news, U.S. federal antitrust investigators are concerned about a potential deal between bankrupt milk processor Dean Foods and Dairy Farmers of America, another major co-op. The justice department is concerned that there will be a loss of competition in some markets for selling raw milk. Who would have thought milk sales would be susceptible to monopolies?
Pro Ag is in Watertown, South Dakota, at the Winter Show Feb. 11-15, and will be presenting seminars at the Fieldhouse on Friday and Saturday 10 - noon, including “2020 Vision Ag Outlook” in which we highlight six reasons why corn should hit $4.65 and soybeans $10.85, by August 1, this year.
Ray is President of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc., a top Ranked marketing firm in the country.
This material has been prepared by a sales or trading employee or agent of Progressive Ag Marketing, Inc. and is, or is in the nature of, a solicitation. This material is not a research report prepared by Progressive Ag Marketing's Research Department. By accepting this communication, you agree that you are an experienced user of the futures markets, capable of making independent trading decisions, and agree that you are not, and will not, rely solely on this communication in making trading decisions.
DISTRIBUTION IN SOME JURISDICTIONS MAY BE PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED BY LAW. PERSONS IN POSSESSION OF THIS COMMUNICATION INDIRECTLY SHOULD INFORM THEMSELVES ABOUT AND OBSERVE ANY SUCH PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTIONS. TO THE EXTENT THAT YOU HAVE RECEIVED THIS COMMUNICATION INDIRECTLY AND SOLICITATIONS ARE PROHIBITED IN YOUR JURISDICTION WITHOUT REGISTRATION, THE MARKET COMMENTARY IN THIS COMMUNICATION SHOULD NOT BE CONSIDERED A SOLICITATION.
The risk of loss in trading futures and/or options is substantial and each investor and/or trader must consider whether this is a suitable investment. Past performance, whether actual or indicated by simulated historical tests of strategies, is not indicative of future results. Trading advice is based on information taken from trades and statistical services and other sources that Progressive Ag Marketing believes are reliable. We do not guarantee that such information is
accurate or complete and it should not be relied upon as such. Trading advice reflects our good faith judgment at a specific time and is subject to change without notice. There is no guarantee that advice we give will result in profitable trades.
