This Seed and Fertilizer Stock Is Soaring After Earnings. It’s a Story of Farming, Weather and Virus.
The first half of the year is when the Northern Hemisphere grows most of its crops.
Agricultural input provider Corteva obliterated Wall Street’s first-quarter earnings expectations . That’s good news. But, as is often the case with farming, things get complicated quickly.
Still, the stock was rising in response and more gains should follow.
Corteva (ticker: CTVA) reported 59 cents in per-share earnings from $4 billion in sales. Analysts predicted 40 cents in earnings from $3.6 billion in sales. Beating sales estimates by more than 10% isn’t typical. What’s more, sales grew about 17% year over year. Things appear to be booming.
But before investors get too excited, they have to consider the nature of farming. Crop planting is dependent on the weather . “We had a terrible start to the year last year,” Corteva CEO Jim Collins said in a phone interview. “North America has broken in a favorable way from a weather prospective this year.”
The impact for a farming-related company is significant. He said the company shipped $100 million worth of operating profit in the last three days of the quarter.
It is far smarter for investors to look at things from a first half of the year perspective. The first half is when the Northern Hemisphere grows most of its crops.
Even though sales shifted into the first quarter, the good news is the first half is looking strong. Farmers are planting more corn and seed pricing is up nicely. Collins is also happy how Corteva’s new fungicide and insecticide products are selling.
The news shouldn’t be a total surprise. Corteva peer FMC (FMC) also beat earnings estimates when it reported on Wednesday. Its stock rose 2.8%. FMC shares are down 8% year to date, better than comparable drops of the Dow Jones Industrial Average and S&P 500 .
Corteva stock was getting a bigger post-earnings bump, up 7.4% in Thursday morning trading. The shares were down about 15% year to date coming into the day.
There are still some risks to be aware of. Currency exchange rates can roil the sector. A lot of business is done in Brazil. What’s more, product is sometimes priced months ahead of when it is delivered. That is another unusual feature of farming. Corteva and FMC have some tools, such as currency hedges, to mitigate risks. Currency alone shouldn’t make or break a year.
And Covid-19 impacts everything, including the Farm Belt. In particular, a lot of corn is turned into ethanol, a gasoline additive that boosts octane. Because Americans aren’t driving as much , corn planting could drop in 2021. That is a concern, but weather and global demand can change a lot between now and next April, when 2021 planting decisions are made.
Corteva is trading for about 15 times estimated 2021 earnings. FMC trades for about 13 times estimated earnings. Both stocks trade at a discount to the broader market.
Barron’s has written positively about both recently, partly because farming isn’t tied to the overall economy. That remains true and both still look like good bets in a Covid, and a post Covid, world.
This Seed and Fertilizer Stock Is Soaring After Earnings. It’s a Story of Farming, Weather and Virus.
Agricultural input provider Corteva obliterated Wall Street’s first-quarter earnings expectations.
