North Dakota farmers have 70% of their corn still in the fields.
DES MOINES, Iowa — On Monday, the USDA confirmed that many Upper Midwestern states cannot even see the finish line of the 2019 corn harvest season.
The only other years this slow for corn harvesting were 1985, 1992, and 2009.
In its weekly USDA Crop Progress Report, the USDA pegged the U.S. corn harvest at 84% complete, below the trade’s expectation of 85% and below the five-year average of 96%.
While Illinois and Iowa, the two-largest corn-producing states have 12% and 14%, respectively, of their corn picking left, North Dakota is only finished harvesting 30% of its crop.
South Dakota has 68% of its corn out of the field, compared with a 96% five-year average.
Michigan and Wisconsin are only halfway done with corn picking.
The USDA pegged the U.S. soybean harvest as 94% complete vs. the trade’s expectation of 95% and a five-year average of 97%.
Today’s report was originally scheduled to be the last Crop Progress report of the 2019 season. However, due to delays in harvest progress, the weekly National Crop Progress report will be extended. NASS will evaluate harvest progress for all crops each week to determine how long to continue the report, the USDA stated in its weekly report.
During the first two weeks of December, NASS will survey over 81,000 United States producers, the USDA announced in its weekly Crop Progress Report Monday.
“One of USDA’s largest survey efforts, the responses will provide the final information about 2019 U.S. row crops focusing on harvested acreage, production, and storage. The survey will also be used to help establish county level estimates used by the Farm Service Agency for the Agriculture Risk Coverage (ARC) program and the Risk Management Agency to administer insurance programs,” USDA stated Monday.
In addition, hog producers will be asked about their current inventory, pig crop, and farrowing intentions for the next six months, according to the announcement.
The results will be available beginning with the Hogs and Pigs report on December 23, followed by the Annual Crop Production Summary and other reports on January 10. County-level row-crop estimates will be released later in 2020, according to the USDA Monday.
