Jul 2nd 2020 - 2pm.
The South Dakota National Guard walks past the Corn Palace while taking part in the 2019 Corn Palace Stampede Rodeo Parade in Mitchell. The United Way will host a Tribute to Essential Workers Parade on July 18 in lieu of the canceled Stampede Rodeo Parade. (Matt Gade / Republic)
The 50th anniversary of the Corn Palace Stampede Rodeo Parade was postponed for a year, but Mitchell won’t be without a parade on July 18.
Seeking a tribute for essential workers during the COVID-19 pandemic, Mitchell United Way Executive Director Dave Stevens thought it would be fitting to host a parade. While there is no attempt to replace the Corn Palace Stampede Rodeo Parade, Stevens thought the Tribute to Essential Workers Parade would be an adequate way to fill the void.
Floats will not be part of the parade, but the hope is for local businesses to provide pick-up trucks or flat-bed trucks for essential workers to ride in uniform as the procession rolls from Ninth Avenue to First Avenue.
“I’ve had two organizations that asked, ‘Are you considering us essential? And the answer is yes,” Stevens said. “It’s the veterinarians, it’s the worker at the fast food place, it’s the worker at Trail King, it’s the worker who delivers gasoline to the gas station -- there’s any number of people that have been affected that have to step up during this period of time.”
Initially, Stevens was hoping to hold the parade on June 20, which was the longest day of the year in terms of daylight. Stevens’ friend and member of the Corn Palace Stampede Rodeo Parade committee, Lance Carson, quickly noted how much went into the planning of a parade and they decided to push it back to July 18.
Typical parade staples such as candy, stickers and fliers are discouraged, but companies have been encouraged to bring trucks with company logos and have employees bring children along for the ride.
“We probably aren’t going to see the big floats and commercial vehicles that we’ve seen in a regular parade,” Carson said. “We hope that we see cars and pick-ups identifying themselves and identifying who’s in the vehicle. … We’re asking (organizations) to give a little bit of a write-up during their entry to give to the announcer so they have something to say about them.”
The deadline to enter the parade is July 13, and the United Way has determined if 30 organizations do not enter, the parade will be canceled. Stevens was mum on how many have already signed up, but the target goal is to hit 100 vehicles.
Attendees will also have a chance to donate to the United Way COVID-19 relief fund, as well as the Mitchell United Way. Stevens sees the parade as an opportunity to get out of the house and bring some life into downtown Mitchell.
“It seems to me that people want to get out and they need a reason,” Stevens said. “We also understand wanting to honor essential workers. This just became an idea and we said, ‘Let’s see what we can do.’ … It can also help out our Main Street. It would bring people to Mitchell, it would bring people downtown and it will coincide the day the Corn Palace will have a musical event on the plaza that afternoon.”
While it is an opportunity to recognize the efforts of essential workers dating back to March, Carson and Stevens also believe it can serve as a reminder that the state and Mitchell community is not completely finished with COVID-19 just yet and the work still continues.
“I think it’s a challenge for them to go to work,” Carson said. “I don’t think it’s the problem it was 90 days ago, but you don’t know. I think we’ve been well-educated on social distancing and using masks and things of that nature. I just hope we have nice weather and people come out to show their appreciation.”
