The trade expected 8% of the corn to be planted.
INDIANOLA, Iowa — The U.S. corn planting pace is slightly behind the five-year pace, according to the USDA.
On Monday, the USDA also released its first 2020 Cop Progress Report that includes soybean planting ratings.
U.S. farmers have 7% of the corn crop in the ground, below five-year average of 9%.
Individual states such as Kansas and Missouri have 6% and 4% planted, respectively.
Meanwhile, Illinois and Indiana farmers have 8% and 4% of their corn seeded, respectively. Each of those two states is ahead of its five-year average.
Iowa has 2% planted vs. a 7% five-year average.
USDA rated the nation’s soybean planting completion rate at 2% vs. a 1% five-year average.
Both Illinois and Indiana have 2% of their crops planted.
In its report Monday, the USDA rated the U.S. winter wheat crop as 57% good/excellent, lower than 62% a week ago. Also, 14% of the crop is headed, below the 15% five-year average.
Crop progress and condition estimates are based on survey data collected each week from early April through the end of November, according to the USDA report.
“The nonprobability crop progress and condition surveys include input from approximately 3,600 respondents whose occupations provide them opportunities to make visual observations and frequently bring them in contact with farmers in their counties. Based on standard definitions, these respondents subjectively estimate the progress of crops through various stages of development, as well as the progress of producer activities. They also provide subjective evaluations of crop conditions,” the USDA stated in its Monday report.
Most respondents complete their questionnaires on Friday or early Monday morning and submit them to the National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) field offices in their states by mail, telephone, fax, email, or through a secured internet website. A small number of reports are completed on Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday, according to the USDA report.
