U.S. farmers are over halfway done with planting corn, USDA says
Iowa farmers have 46% of their soybeans planted.
INDIANOLA, Iowa — The U.S. corn planting is over halfway finished, according to the USDA Monday.
On Monday, the USDA released its Crop Progress Report that shows corn and soybean planting windows have been wide open.
U.S. farmers have 51% of the corn crop in the ground, ahead of a five-year average of 39%.
Individual states such as Iowa have 78% planted vs. a five-year average of 46%. Illinois farmers are 56% done vs. a 54% five-year average, and Indiana farmers have completed 33% of their corn plantings vs. a 26% five-year average.
Meanwhile, 8% of the nation’s corn has emerged vs. a 10% five-year average.
USDA rated the nation’s soybean planting completion rate at 23% vs. an 11% five-year average.
Both Illinois and Indiana have 31% and 22% planted, respectively. Each of those states are well ahead of their average paces.
In Iowa, farmers have 46% of their soybeans planted vs. a 9% five-year average.
In its report Monday, the USDA rated the U.S. winter wheat crop as 55% good/excellent, lower than 54% a week ago. Also, 32% of the crop is headed, below the 38% five-year average.
Crop progress and condition estimates are based on survey data collected each week from early April through the end of November, according to the USDA report.
“The non-probability crop progress and condition surveys include input from approximately 3,600 respondents whose occupations provide them opportunities to make visual observations and frequently bring them in contact with farmers in their counties. Based on standard definitions, these respondents subjectively estimate the progress of crops through various stages of development, as well as the progress of producer activities. They also provide subjective evaluations of crop conditions,” the USDA stated in its Monday report.
Most respondents complete their questionnaires on Friday or early Monday morning and submit them to the National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) field offices in their states by mail, telephone, fax, email, or through a secured internet website. A small number of reports are completed on Thursday, Saturday, and Sunday, according to the USDA report.
