USDA forecast big stocks on the horizon: Grain Market Daily
Yesterday, the USDA released their first new-crop supply and demand estimates for global grains.
Whilst the market isn’t initially shocked by these, the context does frame a longer-term bearish view to grain markets with growing global stocks and increases in production.
Global wheat production is forecast at 768.5Mt, 4Mt higher year-on-year.
Global demand sees a modest increase to 753Mt.
Global wheat ending stocks for 2020/21 are forecast at 310Mt, a 15Mt increase on the 20/19/20 season.
Global maize production is forecast at 1,1186Mt, a massive 72Mt increase from 2019/20
US maize production is the main increase with a 406Mt crop forecast, increasing by 59Mt on the year as plantings rapidly outpace last year’s rain interrupted spring
Global maize demand is seen up 41Mt to 1,161Mt, but this does not prevent a 25Mt increase in global maize ending stocks to 339Mt.
Global soyabean production is forecast to rise to a record 362Mt, up 26.6Mt on the year.
The report highlights expectations of a large rise in South American soyabean production, with output in Brazil and Argentina up a combined 9.5Mt.
Global demand is forecast to increase by just 13Mt, to 360.7Mt. However, stocks expected to fall, with an increase in international trade and renewed stock building in China.
Whilst this is the first new-crop update that we have seen from the USDA, weather can still play a part in changing production forecasts. However, the increase in stocks and larger production does highlight a significant bearish mood for the market in the longer-term. Large maize production in the US is likely to weigh on global market for the next year, especially with slow demand from US ethanol refineries in the light of coronavirus stalling global economic progress.
And what about the UK?
From the UK’s point of view, we can’t forget that the pull of the global market will always outweigh domestic markets in the longer-term. This USDA report highlights a significant price risk to feed grains with the rebound in maize production. Given the UK is likely to be a net-importer of grains in 2020/21, the potential for cheap maize to undercut domestic values remains.
Despite a smaller UK crop this year, we can’t let this cloud our judgement of price potential being negatively impacted by a bearish global market.
This will also impact the price outlook for barley considering we forecast a large UK barley potential yesterday , the need to export into an oversupplied global feed grain market will weigh on values.
You can subscribe to receive Grain Market Daily straight to your inbox. Simply fill in your contact details on our online form and select the information you wish to receive.
The release of the latest AHDB usage data has shown animal feed production down across all sectors in May.
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES) estimates that Australia’s wheat production for 2020/21 will reach 26.6Mt, up 11.5Mt on the year.
UK feed barley prices could face further pressure in 2020/21 after data shows Canadian farmers have planted the most acres to barley since 2009.
Although yields are uncertain, there will be another significant barley crop this year. Prices may see pressure later in harvest from the spring crop, and then may gain slightly as farmer selling slows.
Top global grain supplier Russia are already proposing the imposition an export quota onto the second half (Jan -Jun) of the 2020/21 marketing year, although the volume has not been announced it has potential ramifications for global and UK prices.
UK wheat could receive either a boost or come under additional pressure in the next few weeks from what happens to US maize crops as they’re now at a critical growth stage.
Have you factored these risks into your marketing plan, cash flow and business plan for the next 2 seasons?
Now that the latest WASDE report figures are known, it is important to examine the other factors that could provide sentiment for wheat markets between now and harvest.
In response to the continued dry weather through May, the EU’s Crop Monitoring (MARS) service has further downgraded its forecasts for UK crop yields, including spring barley.
Wheat prices fall as USDA increases stocks: Grain Market Daily
US wheat markets fell to a 3-week low at close yesterday and imposed pressure on global and UK wheat markets to follow. Global wheat season-end stocks and US wheat production estimates were raised in the USDA’s world supply and demand estimates (WASDE) released yesterday.
New crop delivered milling wheat premiums (North West) have recently extended to their widest point over new crop feed futures, in June, since 2011/12.
The latest crop development report released last month does not pose much confidence for UK rapeseed in 2020/21.
UK feed wheat futures prices have been variable over recent weeks, at least in part due to uncertainty over the impact of unfavourable weather on crops in Europe and the Black Sea region.
Barley usage for the brewing, malting and distilling sector in April was just 114.7kt. This is the lowest figure in over a decade.
As we move towards harvest 2020, the value of imported grains and oilseeds will play a key role in setting the price of domestic supplies, the value of imported maize will prove pivotal to setting values in feed markets.
An update to US planting figures: Grain market daily
Planting figures for US maize and soyabean crops were slightly below market pre-release estimates, according to Monday’s US crop progress report. Progress has slowed from the rapid pace seen at the start of the season, but remains above the five-year average (2015-19).
Higher UK wheat supplies due to a large production year and relatively stable demand, combined with our export campaign slowing considerably post October have resulted in a large increase in closing stocks.
During our barley week last week, we highlighted the increase in trade tensions between China and Australia, with the former potentially imposing a $74/t tariff on imports of Australian barley. This offers a high degree of price risk for domestic barley, particularly given the significant export volumes expected from the UK next year.
News of countries beginning to ease lockdown measures has enabled vegetable oil prices to show some signs of recovery. UK rapeseed prices have benefitted from both this rise in Paris futures and a weakening GBP/EUR exchange rate.
In the latest ADAS Crop Condition report, 26% of winter wheat is rated ‘very poor’ or ‘poor’, this is a considerably large increase from last year when it was 5%.
