'We want everyone to be safe, so that was a big factor in all our decisions'
The 2020 Sweet Corn Festival Queen Pageant and Sweet Corn Festival Mini Pageant will go on, but there will only be a limited amount of people in attendance; the event will be live-streamed online.
Sweet corn sales still are a go at the Mendota Sweet Corn Festival, but more details will be released regarding when/how it will be sold.
MENDOTA — The annual Mendota Sweet Corn Festival will happen this year, but there will not be thousands of people walking the downtown area like normal.
Wednesday, the Mendota Area Chamber of Commerce announced certain events will still go on in August despite the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Mendota Sweet Corn Festival occurs the second weekend of August every year; this year is the 73rd edition of the popular festival.
“We want everyone to be safe, so that was a big factor in all our decisions for this year,” said Kate Fox, President & CEO of the Chamber. “Everything is going to be online and virtual.”
There will be no carnival, food vendors, parade, entertainment, beer garden or craft and flea market.
Normally, 60,000 people attend the festival throughout the weekend, Fox said. No more than 50 people in a space are allowed in Illinois until the state reaches Phase 5 in the Restore Illinois plan.
The chamber had to inform the carnival by Wednesday, July 1, if the carnival would go on, she said.
This past August, Del Monte announced it would begin layoffs in October 2019 and would completely close the Mendota plant in June 2020.
This year’s festival sweet corn will be from Del Monte, Fox said.
“We’ve still made arrangements to get it,” she said.
“(The festival) means a lot to everyone in Mendota, it means a lot to us at the Chamber office, and we love putting it on for the community,” Fox said.
The 2020 Sweet Corn Festival Queen Pageant and Sweet Corn Festival Mini Pageant will go on, but there will only be a limited amount of people in attendance; the event will be live-streamed online. The 50/50 Drawing will also happen, but will also be live-streamed.
Sweet corn sales and festival apparel will be available as well.
The Mendota Area Chamber of Commerce released the following press release on Wednesday:
The annual sweet corn festival has been conducted for more than 70 years.
The festival queen pageant, mini pageant, 50/50 drawing, sweet corn sales and apparel sales will continue.
"Not a single person could have predicted the unparalleled situation in which we find ourselves in," read a press statement about the announcement. "Identical to every other year, the safety and well-being of every festival goer is at the top of our list."
" ... We look forward to welcoming back the thousands to enjoy the carnival and parade when the Sweet Corn Festival returns to the World’s Greatest Little City in 2021," the statement continued.
The crowning of the 73rd Annual Sweet Corn Festival Queen is scheduled 8 p.m. Friday, Aug. 7. This event will be live streamed on the Sweet Corn Festival Facebook page and WGLC 100.1 FM Facebook page.
The crowning of the Sweet Corn Festival Mini King and Queen is scheduled 7 p.m. Friday, Aug. 7. Applications may be picked up at the MACC Office, 800 Washington St., or at www.sweetcornfestival.com.
Sweet Corn Festival 50/50 tickets will be sold until 4 p.m. Sunday, Aug. 9. The drawing will take place at about 5 p.m. Aug. 9 in front of the MACC, 800 Washington St. This drawing also will be live streamed on the Sweet Corn Festival and WGLC 100.1 FM Facebook pages.
Purchase tickets online at sweetcornfestival.com or in person at the MACC or from any board of director member or ambassador member.
Sweet corn sales still are planned. The board will announce more details on its Facebook page.
The board will start taking orders Friday, July 10. Purchase shirts one of two ways: in person at the MACC Office or at www.sweetcornfestival.com.
If anyone has questions regarding the Sweet Corn Festival, call 815-539-6507 or email kfox@mendotachamber.com
