Jun 18th 2020 - 4pm.
Corn Palace decorator Austin Kleinsasser ties up sour dock behind the Corn Palace during a break in the rain on Thursday morning. (Matt Gade / Republic)
Weather has not been kind to the Corn Palace’s lead decorator Jeff Hanson since he took over in February 2019.
After the rain and flooding in September killed half the rye needed to decorate the Corn Palace’s outer walls, Hanson is facing a similar dilemma. The June 8 and 9 severe storms that passed through Mount Vernon destroyed farmer Bret Lowrie's 10-acre field of rye, forcing the Corn Palace to have to come up with a Plan B, or even a Plan C.
“That storm was coming in and I was like, ‘We're gonna lose our rye,’” Hanson said.
Hanson was right. He received the news through text and photo messages from Lowrie, who said the rye will not reach the needed height. And because of the damage, there won’t be enough of it.
Hanson is trying to secure rye from another farmer near Fulton to make up for the loss, but he is also working on other backup options.
All of this comes after a rough spring in 2019 that delayed the planting of the rye, followed by the harsh rains in September that didn’t allow the rye to mature in time and flooded the field. Then, it was a tough winter for the decorators as they had to leave up some of the older murals and wait until the summer to swap out with the current theme of South Dakota.
Hanson said the corn that was put in storage in January for the 2020 murals got too wet and didn’t hold up well enough, so officials also have to wait until the corn comes in before changing again.
The goal going forward is to get more rye to finish the south wall of the Corn Palace. If the Corn Palace doesn’t acquire enough rye, decorators will finish the south wall around the murals with corn and sour dock, evening out the two different types of plants for one cohesive design.
“What we're hoping is to get another rye field, so we can still continue as normal,” Hanson said. “And then we'll put the (sour) dock in along the bottom, so the decorations match in the front.”
Hanson and his crew have picked a cattle grazing field of its sour dock, measuring roughly 30 by 200 feet and owned by Mount Vernon farmer Dale Kroupa. The decorators are in the process of tying the sour dock, while waiting for the possible rye and corn to come in.
Due to a hiring freeze by the city as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and an expected loss in tax revenue, the Corn Palace wasn’t able to hire any additional help this summer. The Corn Palace traditionally hires high school or college students to work on the murals in the summertime, cutting, trimming and binding the plants and the corn to place on the walls.
Hanson said one part-time decorator already working with the Corn Palace that has helped with the murals but the city is mostly relying on the maintenance staff to finish working on the murals.
Currently, corn covers about half of the usual wall space it occupies on the south side of the Corn Palace wall. (Matt Gade / Republic)
Portions of the front of the Corn Palace are decorated with rye. Due to a storm last week, the field of rye the Corn Palace originally planned on utilizing was wiped out. (Matt Gade / Republic)
Bret Lowrie's 10-acre field of rye destroyed by the storm last week. (Courtesy photo)
Bret Lowrie's 10-acre field of rye destroyed by the storm last week. (Courtesy photo)
