Beef producers are used to sending their cattle out of province, but now the demand is growing for local meat.
“People are wanting to know where their meat comes from with everything going on,” says Larry Weatherby, Chair of the Nova Scotia Cattle Producers Association.
Weatherby tells NEWS 95.7’s The Todd Veinotte Show that although prices of meat at the supermarket have gone up during the pandemic, producers aren’t making more.
“The consumer is paying actually more. The farmer’s actually taken a 30 per cent cut in prices on their meat,” he explains, saying packing plants are the ones making a profit.
In the Maritimes, Weatherby says the largest and only federal beef slaughter plant is on Prince Edward Island.
“We’ve lost all of our kill plants here in the province over the last probably 10 to 12 years,” he says. “Everything just went downhill. We used to have a couple decent sized kill plants and they’re all gone.”
The cattle farmer says most of his beef goes to the plant in P.E.I., but then he has no say in where it ends up.
“Some of the meat coming back in the province would actually be our own meat, but when you look at the stats where it’s coming from it says it’s coming from out of province,” he says.
Recently, Nova Scotians shopping at farmer’s markets and butcher’s shops have shown an increased demand for local meat.
“We sell a little bit from home here, and we have more people looking now for hamburger and roast and pig than ever before,” says Weatherby.
In the province, Weatherby says there are over 18,000 cattle spread across 400 farms. Although farmers expected the price to go up this spring, COVID-19 has brought the opposite effect.
“We’re trying to grow the beef industry the last couple years, and every time we seem to start growing we get something else hitting at us to drive our price down,” he says. “Prices this spring, they projected cattle to be at $2.76 a pound and right now we’re getting $2.31. It’s quite a drop in price.”
Weatherby says there are few workers on farms, and the numbers are dwindling every day.
“People don’t want to be co-mingling with other people. It’s getting hard,” he says. “We know it’s not going away any time quick, and it’s going to be a serious impact on the farmers.”
Victoria is HalifaxToday.ca's weekend editor and a Halifax-based freelancer. She is originally from Nova Scotia's Annapolis Valley.
