Station owner, Alida Woodland, said they both had to return to Perth to self-isolate for 14 days.
Kununurra growers also met with police to raise their concerns about the exemptions.
It is understood more agricultural workers are already travelling north after leaving their rentals and jobs in Perth to pick fruit and vegetables on farms in the Ord Valley in the Kimberley.
Diggers Rest cattle station requires workers who can muster on horseback.
Ms White said the KPCA had been liaising with the State Government and the WA Police Kimberley District Superintendent to give agricultural industries in the Kimberley some clarity.
She was confident "teething issues" would be worked out by authorities in the coming days.
"Announcements are being made and the bureaucrats are having to scramble to catch up with the paperwork … and that is what's so unique about this situation and something that people are going to have to understand," Ms White said.
The regional border controls are being operated by the WA Police at Kimberley airports, ports, and roads.
Police turned away six arrivals between the Broome and Kununurra airports yesterday who did not meet entry requirements.
Regional border controls are being operated by WA Police at the WA/NT border checkpoint and Sandfire Roadhouse.
Yesterday the State Government launched a new website linking job seekers with primary producers during the COVID-19 outbreak.
Ms MacTiernan told the ABC Country Hour anyone who secures employment through the service will be exempt from the regional travel restrictions.
A spokesperson later said the State Government was aware of the issues with the movement of pastoral and agricultural staff in the Kimberley and was working to find a solution.
Wyndham East Kimberley shire president, David Menzel, urged people to be patient.
He said authorities were working as quickly as possible.
"An amazing amount of credit is due to the emergency services for what they have achieved in such a short time," Mr Menzel said.
WA has closed its borders and all travellers entering the NT are now subject to a 14-day quarantine.
The State Government announced further intrastate travel in WA yesterday, with travel from one WA region to another to be banned from midnight on Tuesday.
Ms White said it was not clear whether the new intrastate border controls would override the current regional restrictions in the Kimberley which fell under Commonwealth jurisdiction.
"We are being assured this is being rectified as a priority so that there is, to the greatest degree possible, harmonisation of definitions across the various border control regimes," she said.
Ms White said many pastoral stations were already isolating workers arriving in the north, in preparation for the muster season.
"We have to be at the forefront of understanding all the requirements because of the interconnective nature of the northern cattle trade across WA, NT and Queensland," she said
Space to play or pause, M to mute, left and right arrows to seek, up and down arrows for volume.
