A contraction in world trade, uncertain UK trading conditions, domestic consumers changing how they consume dairy and ever-challenging weather extremes. In this article we take a long-term view of what could shape the UK dairy industry over the coming years, and how to best equip ourselves to take advantage.
Like the finished pig market, EU sow prices have come under significant pressure recently.
The closure of the large German processing plant in Rheda-Wiedenbruck, which has also been suspended from exporting to China, is a concern.
Overall the disruption and uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to continue for many more months. For a second consecutive year, global meat production is expected to contract.
May GB milk production totalled 1,138 million litres, 1.9% below May 2019
Milk processing in April saw a shift away from liquid milk and towards cheddar, powders and butter, the latest Defra figures confirm.
Red meat demand appears to have bounced back and is now overall slightly up year-on-year. Beef and pork have both recorded growth, while lamb is steady.
We take a more in-depth look at how coronavirus is impacting production and demand in some of the key European dairying regions.
How many key GB pork processing plants would need to close before potential spare capacity elsewhere is exceeded?
The UK retail market currently prices mince and top cuts slightly differently than other countries, including those operating in the global beef market.
NZ lamb exports to China recover, Europe down
Exports from New Zealand were subdued during quarter one. pril brought with it a change in dynamic. With many Asian countries, including China, beginning to recover from coronavirus, shipments increased. Exports to Europe however dropped, as demand was weak, also due to coronavirus.
There have been many significant challenges in the US beef market since March.
We estimate that COVID-19 has cost GB producers approximately £28 million in April and May. But how does this vary between the devolved nations?
Markets saw further improvements this past week, driven by reduced milk availability as much as improved demand.
GB daily milk deliveries for the week ending 9 May averaged 37.01 million litres per day, up 0.4% on the previous week.
Markets firmed in the past week as some demand has returned to the markets.
