Bidr General Manager Tania Smith and South Island Territory Manager Thomas Mallon at the Southern Field Days, Waimumu, Gore, in February.
"It's always been open to a number of agencies but given the issues we have with Covit-19, the bidr​ board, which I am chairman of, made the decision to open it up to any livestock company that wants to use it.
"We've certainly had massive inquiry since the sale yards closed down, whether how much that turns into actual listings, time will tell."
Moore, who is based in the Waikato, said it was decided to open up bidr to competing companies too, to help keep trade moving during the unusual times.
At least seven new livestock trading firms had registered recently, including Carrfields Livestock Limited.
Bidr operates in a similar fashion to other online trading sites. People can register as buyers or sellers.
Accredited assessors are following strict protocols to allow them to visit farms, to gather information on the stock, produce videos and photos to feature on the online auction.
Stock agents who haven't been able to complete the assessor training, because of Covid-19 restrictions, will be able to list livestock and will take responsibility of the auction lot on behalf of their vendor.
Farmers buying can appoint a stock agent to bid of their behalf, if they can't virtually attend the online auctions, which are usually held late afternoon or evening.
"The auctions are run one lot at a time. Farmers bid online and when it hits the reserve, it goes on the market, and the highest bid wins the auction."
A bidr assessor inspects a pen of sheep to gather data for an auction. A video and photos are also made of the stock for buyers to review online.
More said stock is transported from "farm to farm", from the seller's property to the buyer's property.
Initially, this was marketed as a big advantage to eliminate transporting livestock to sale yards, reducing the potential for contamination and improving the welfare of animals.
Now, it's a must because there are no sale yards operating.
Moore said bidr was developed in-house along with system and software companies.
It was originally designed to be operated remotely which means it's an ideal tool now, as most people are now working from home.
"We've got a great team of people working on bidr and a help desk with can talk farmers' language, to show them how to set up an account and explain how it works.
"We are looking at putting more resource into that team right now, with the prospect of more people wanting to use it."
Bidr General Manager Tania Smith said she'd normally have four staff based at Hamilton's Ruakura Research Centre and two sales managers working around the country. All were working from home now.
"We've run auctions remotely before, I think one of our first we ran from a hotel room in Christchurch."
Smith said initially, uptake of the virtual auction was slow but that was to be expected given the tradition of sale yard auctions stretched back about 100 years.
Coronavirus had helped the online business turn a corner.
Sheep, lambs, dairy, beef are the staple stock listings on the auction site.
"We also hosted a stud deer sale last year with great success. We had well over 1000 bidders that night on 40 lots, with 100 per cent clearance. It exceeded expectations."
Key information: Sign up to get Stuff's daily coronavirus situation report email newsletter. It's a quick summary of the essential updates from New Zealand and around the world on Covid-19.
