Here's what went wrong in California, according to a state senator
California State Senator Dr. Richard Pan speaks with CNN's Kate Bolduan on July 1. CNN
Asked about what went wrong with the state’s coronavirus cases, California State Senator Dr. Richard Pan, a Democrat, told CNN's Kate Bolduan that “people got complacent."
Pan said reopening may have given people the impression that the virus was going away. The politicization of the virus also may have shifted focus away from fighting the virus when public health officials should be delivering the message.
Pan slammed President Trump's response, urging him to have his public health experts speak to the press.
“He needs to put his public health people in front, talking about what we need to do and he needs to support them. For example, the CDC has been completely silenced. Experts at the CDC who spoke out early are now not permitted to talk to the press,” said Pan.
He pointed out that Dr. Deborah Birx and Dr. Anthony Fauci, members of the White House coronavirus task force, “tend to play second fiddle to the President.”
“We need to stop politicizing this pandemic," Pan said.
He said closing some bars and locations is helpful but he appealed to people’s use of free will to decide how they impact others.
With the holiday weekend looming, Pan had a message for Americans: “Let’s be sure we have freedom from this disease. Let’s be sure we protect each other. And we need our public health officials to be up front, educating us, and what we need to do to stop this pandemic.”
UK has "adequate supplies" of remdesivir, top medical official says
The UK has “adequate supplies” of the antiviral drug remdesivir , England’s Deputy Chief Medical Officer Jonathan Van-Tam told lawmakers Wednesday.
Van-Tam was speaking to the House of Commons Science and Technology Committee after the United States bought 100% of the production of the drug, which has been shown to have some effect against coronavirus.
He said that although quantities of the drug will be “less plentiful” and “less easy to obtain,” the UK has “adequate supplies” of the treatment drug.
Some background: Clinical trials suggest that the antiviral drug helped reduce the length of coronavirus patient hospital stays.
The UK has not yet conducted its own formal assessment of the drug, which has been recommended for European authorization by the European Medicines Agency.
Van-Tam said the UK Task Force had been keeping “a very close eye” on the progress of trials elsewhere. Remdesivir is currently available for emergency use by clinicians in UK hospitals.
Van-Tam called the dexamethasone trials “the most dramatic success in terms of active success and rapid recruitment,” hailing the drug as an “extremely cheap” and “accessible” form of treatment.
“Depending on which medicine you discover works for Covid-19, if it’s one of the ones that is already licensed for something else, then it tends to be plentifully available. But if it’s something brand spanking new from a developer it is likely to be in short supply in the first instance,” he added.
The mayor of Lakeway, Texas, a city in the Lake Travis area outside Austin, is asking teens who attended a June 20 party known as "Pong Fest" to self-isolate as the Covid-19 case rate continues to climb in the area.
"The large gathering of teenagers took place in a community just outside of the City of Lakeway," Mayor Sandy Cox wrote in an email to CNN Wednesday. "We have asked that anyone who attended the gathering and those they live with to self-isolate and contact their physician."
Cox said there were a number of infected students at the party, some of whom "didn't know they were positive until after the party.”
"We are asking that participation in gatherings be mentioned for contact tracing purposes when people are getting tested," Shelly Parks, spokesperson for the Austin Homeland Security & Emergency Management, said Wednesday in a statement to CNN. "Epidemiologists are asking that participation in gatherings be mentioned during their contact tracing investigations because the virus often hides in the healthy and is given to those who are at grave risk of being hospitalized or dying."
Parks said because of medical privacy law known as HIPAA, the agency would not be disclosing the number of cases resulting from Pong Fest.
Lakeway has had 105 cases, 50 of which are currently active, Cox said.
"This is the highest point we have been in our area," Cox said during a Facebook Live event on June 25. "Unfortunately our case load is probably going to increase."
Cox, who made repeated calls in her June 25 Facebook Live for her constituents to wear masks and socially distance, said the city has been working with the local hospital, Baylor Scott & White, to ensure both the party-goers and anyone they have interacted with get tested.
