CHICO — Feared beef shortages and concern about the coronavirus have combined in a double hit for cattle producers nationwide — and Butte County’s ranchers feel the pressure.
Processing plants across the country closed or were forced to slow production due to cases of COVID-19 among workers. The United Food and Commercial Workers International Union representing 1.3 million food and retail workers said Tuesday that 20 food-processing and meatpacking union workers in the U.S. died of the virus, and an estimated 6,500 are sick or have been exposed to someone who tested positive.
President Donald Trump’s executive order Tuesday will keep meat processing plants, which local cattle producers depend upon, open (under the Defense Production Act to classify meat processing as critical infrastructure) and give companies protection in case workers get sick.
Some ranchers are relieved to get back access to processing for their products. Others are fearing for workers’ safety.
Butte County Cattlemen’s Association President and cattle rancher Holly Foster said, “As a rancher who raises beef cattle, we depend on processing facilities to get that product ready to go to consumers.”
While Foster said her family farm in Butte Valley, Robert Foster Ranch, doesn’t sell cattle until July, smaller farms needing to move their beef now are heavily impacted by the plant closures.
“The closures due to sickness and deaths do have a huge impact on our markets because there are relatively few packing plants to service the producers throughout the country,” she said. “As a result, you basically have a bottleneck in our economy.”
The quandary is how to provide enough cattle-processing facilities while still protecting workers, she said.
Although some farmers sell directly to consumers, Foster said, “There’s no way to legally bypass a plant to legally sell beef — it must be processed in federally-inspected facility to protect consumers. You can’t flip a switch overnight and build a packing plant overnight for Butte County to be able to process meat.”
Foster said she approves of the executive order from Trump.
“It will be helpful and gives facilities some ability to navigate the situation better while still protecting the health of workers,” she said. “They perform a vital service to our food supply in this country.”
Butte County cattle rancher Megan Brown said her main way of reaching consumers is through processing her meat for approval at the packing plants, but she is concerned that they can reopen.
“Workers in those plants are mainly migrant workers and they’re getting sick,” Brown said, referencing reports that many packing plant workers are migrant or temporary workers.
“That’s not OK. We need to put workers first,” Brown said of Trump’s order.
In order to avoid working with the plants, Brown said she would normally sell cattle in livestock auctions, but instead auction outlets are asking ranchers to hold onto the cattle.
She can’t sell enough cattle to friends and family, and said there are no nearby slaughterhouses “that can fit me in to meet USDA (requirements).”
However, not everyone has the freezer space for half a cow, she said — that’s what makes it necessary to seek customers on social media who are interested in quarter shares of beef, or even smaller portions.
Brown said she spent March delivering hamburger meat to customers’ doors. She accepted payment using Venmo and PayPal to avoid contact. This proved to be a huge amount of work, she said.
While Brown says she has a large enough customer base to get by — “I sold four beef just this morning” she said Tuesday — resources are running low. This is the time of year when some cattle are moved out of the foothills to higher altitudes, especially as Butte County’s rainfall measures abnormally dry by U.S. Drought Monitor measurements.
“Grass is starting to get yellow and dry,” she said. Moving some cattle to her other ranch in the Sierra Nevada mountains could buy “a few months” of feed and water for those remaining on the ranch.
“This month is when we would sell them (at auctions) but we’re keeping them, which puts a lot of pressure on the other ranch,” she said.
“I’m going to try to keep doing it this way. But it takes 90 days to finish out a beef. I have to plan for it and feed them.”
As for working with processing plants, Brown said she doesn’t have a choice.
“Selling them at the auction would be shooting yourself in the foot,” Brown said.
“There’s no need to be overreactive, ” Butte County Farm Bureau Executive Director Colleen Cecil said of beef shortage worries. “There are some hiccups in the supply chain right now, but there’s no shortage of food.”
She added that people “could take advantage” of the animals available due to the Silver Dollar Fair and Glenn County Fair cancellations. Hundreds of kids have raised livestock for the last few months with the purpose of auctioning it off at the fair.
“All of those can be purchased and processed locally so people can put those animals in their freezer,” Cecil said.
Those interested can visit glennagexpo.org for the Glenn County sale May 15-16, Cecil said. Purchases will be tax-deductible. Buyers can also visit www.bidcal.com for the Silver Dollar Fair Jr. Livestock Sale from May 16-21.
“We’ll definitely recover,” Foster said, “The (executive) order does help recognize the importance of our food supply.”
The Associated Press contributed to this report.
