We’re committed to maintaining vital services for our customers, and have made changes to adapt to the current emergency situation.
In line with government coronavirus (COVID-19) guidance , we have closed the majority of our offices, and equipped our processing and helpline teams to carry on their important work from home. We are all fully focused on making vital payments to the rural community and helping customers submit their claims and applications.
To make sure you follow the government advice on social distancing, please do not visit or hand in any correspondence or supporting documents to any of our local offices.
To make sure your documents get to us follow the advice below. We will continue to keep you up to date with any changes.
We work in partnership with Farming Help organisations to support their work to help the farming community through challenging times. If this affects you, please either contact them on 03000 111 999, visit their Farming Help website  or call us on 03000 200 301.
How to submit your applications, claims, evidence and other supporting documents
See at a glance the different ways to submit applications, claims and documents to us.
The Rural Payments service is available and you should use this wherever possible.
It’s the quickest and most secure way for you to send your applications, claims and supporting documents to us, and it will help us to start processing your application or claim as quickly as possible.
Where there is no option to use the Rural Payments service or you are unable to access the online service, you currently have 2 options.
You can email us at ruralpayments@defra.gov.uk where the guidance confirms there is an existing email service. We recommend you use this.
When you email us make sure you include the name of the scheme in the subject heading, for example 
  ‘Countryside Stewardship Mid Tier query’. This will help your email get to the right department quickly.
  contact details. We may contact you by email or telephone, so check your details in the Rural Payments 
  service , and update them or register if necessary.
Also, please make sure your permission levels for CS and BPS are set and are correct. You can find more 
We cannot accept supporting documents and evidence that we need to access from links to an external shared drive facility, for example Dropbox or Google Drive.
If there’s no existing email service and you would normally post something to us, you 
  should continue to use the post.
  delivery offices. If you need to post documents to us, we would encourage you to do so as soon as you can.
If you’re unable to get online or post a paper application form, paper claim form, or supporting documents to us 
  before the application or claim deadlines, please call our helpline on 03000 200 301.
In line with government COVID-19 guidance , drop-in centres will not be available this year for handing in any correspondence and supporting documents.
Where the person with the correct permissions is not able to sign any forms, due to coronavirus (COVID-19) 
  front of the document or next to the signature box. We will verify the signature before making any payments to 
As we’re unable to open any drop-in centres this year, please do not bring any documents to our offices (even if they are listed as accepting postal deliveries ). We’re unable to accept correspondence or documents in person.
You can use the Rural Payments service to transfer BPS entitlements to someone else, transfer land to someone else, and remove land from your holding. This is the quickest and best way to tell us about changes. Or you can add land by email .
If you need to submit an RLE1 form to us, you can now do this electronically, by email, to tell us about entitlement transfers, land transfers and land changes.
You can download an RLE1 form , complete it electronically following the RLE1 guidance, and return it to us as a PDF email attachment.
If you are unable to get online or email it to us, you can print an RLE1 form , complete it by hand, and post it to us.
We understand that organic certification bodies are making arrangements to issue certification and conversion documents where they are unable to make site visits.
We will accept all such documents in whatever format the organic body issues them in, where it’s necessary to support BPS and CS applications, and CS and ES claims.
If you’re unable to get online, you can post a copy to us.
A phased return to on-farm visits and site inspections started on 1 June and are based on business priority, starting with Countryside Stewardship and Environmental Stewardship inspections.
To ensure we work within the regulations arising from COVID-19, we are adopting a revised approach to inspections, including the use of technology and remote inspections. We are also contacting customers before a visit to find out if there are any issues we need to be aware of, including vulnerability, and we are following social distancing rules at all times.
The deadline for submitting applications, with penalties, for BPS 2020 is extended to midnight on 10 July 2020.
You should apply online using the Rural Payments service as this is the quickest and safest method to use. However, you will need to post any supporting documents to us, such as the Young and new farmer form or BP5 continuation form.
If you cannot get online, you can post a paper application form (BP5) and supporting documents – such as a Young and new farmer form, or continuation form - to us as we are currently able to accept them by post.
If you’re unable to get online or post a paper application form or supporting documents to us before the application deadline, please call our helpline on 03000 200 301.
We’re not able to offer an email route to return BP5 forms or supporting documents to us. Please continue to post these to us.
Initial applications are now closed.
If your initial application is successful, Natural England advisers and Forestry Commission woodland officers are aiming to continue providing technical advice to help you develop your final application.
We’re looking at other ways in which we can continue to provide support and advice remotely on Higher Tier applications (and on SSSI approvals) over this period.
The deadline to submit your application remains as midnight on 31 July 2020.
During the current coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak, an off-farm advice programme is available where applicants can contact an adviser and book a clinic session .
The deadline for submitting CS annual revenue claims, with penalties, is extended to midnight on 10 July 2020.
You should apply online using the Rural Payments service as this is the quickest and safest method to use.
If you cannot get online to use the Rural Payments service, you can download a Countryside Stewardship revenue claim form . Then, either email your form and supporting documents to us at ruralpayments@defra.gov.uk or post your form and any supporting documents to us.
If you are unable to get online or post your claim form to us before the application deadline, please call us on 0300 200 301 and choose the option to request a pre-populated claim form.
If you have problems collecting all the evidence for your capital claim due to coronavirus (COVID-19) illness or restrictions, please do all you can to submit your claim, making it clear that your evidence is missing due to coronavirus (COVID-19). Please continue to collect the evidence as soon as you are able to do so, and keep hold of it as we’ll ask for it at a later date.
The deadline for submitting ES annual revenue claims, with penalties, is extended to midnight on 10 July 2020.
You should submit your claim form to us by email, if possible, as this is the quickest and safest way for it to reach us.
The deadline for submitting woodland legacy revenue claims is extended to midnight on 15 June 2020.
The deadline for submitting claims has been extended by 2 months to 31 July 2020. If you have yet to submit your claim, we have emailed you about this change. You should submit your claim as soon as you are able to do so.
Read Questions and Answers on coronavirus (COVID-19) Response for the most common questions about arrangements for delivering existing RDPE Growth programme projects and for applications under the Round 3 call.
Due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak, temporary changes have been made to how cattle keepers request amendments to cattle passports.
Read about how to request amendments to cattle passports during the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak.
We want to reach as many customers as possible during these challenging times. Therefore, we are sending reminders to more of our BPS and CS contacts we hold in the Rural Payment service who have ‘submit’ or ‘full’ permissions.
If multiple agents have ‘submit’ or ‘full’ permissions, the agent with ‘full’ business permission supersedes those with ‘submit’
If multiple agents have ‘full business’ permissions, they all receive any communications
If there is no agent with ‘full’ business permission, but there are multiple agents with ‘submit’ permissions, they will all receive any communications
If no agents fit the above criteria, the same criteria will be used against the remaining people with permissions.
You need to be certain that any correspondence or contact you receive from us is genuine as there are coronavirus (COVID-19) related scams from people claiming to be from other government departments. Please read the Be aware of fraud section below, which will help you to protect yourself.
Where there is no email option available, use the following addresses for anything urgent
