A further two major livestock events have been cancelled due to ongoing concerns over the coronavirus pandemic.
UK Dairy Day and the National Sheep Association’s (NSA) Sheep Event were due to take place in September and October, respectively, but have been forced to cancel based on government guidance, organisers said.
The one-day dairy event will return to Telford on 15 September 2021.
Sue Cope, UK Dairy Day event director, said: “Our top priority has to be the health and safety of our visitors, exhibitors, employees, venue support team and the wider community.
“We look forward to welcoming everyone to the 2021 event. In the meantime, please stay safe and be proud of the amazing commitment and hard work that British dairy farmers and the industry have delivered during these uncertain times.”
NSA’s Sheep Event will next take place at the Three Counties Showground in Worcestershire in 2022, as a biennial event on 27 July.
Phil Stocker, NSA chief executive, said he is disappointed at the cancellation but the ongoing pandemic had left the organisation with no choice.
It is working on alternative online plans that will offer opportunities for trade, breed societies and other interested organisations to be involved, to promote their products and offers to the industry, he added.
Organisers of The Royal Welsh Show have launched a virtual event on 1 July, which will focus on educating the public about agriculture, Welsh produce and the environment.
The four-day event was due to take place in Llanelwedd, Builth Wells, from 20-23 July.
Steve Hughson, chief executive of the Royal Welsh Agricultural Society, said: “This pandemic is causing organisations to seek new ways of engaging with their customers and stakeholders, and the Royal Welsh is no different.
“We continue to move with the times and will use technology to educate people about the value of agriculture and local produce, share knowledge within agriculture around best practice, find new ways to entertain and also share memories, creating a nostalgic library of peoples’ favourite parts of the show and reasons for coming.”
The Great Yorkshire Show has also moved online, with virtual events taking place from 14-16 July.
Organisers Yorkshire Agricultural Society said the event will champion and celebrate farming, food and the countryside.
The British Cattle Breeders Club (BCBC) has said its conference on 26 January 2021 will be held online.
The e-conference theme is “Our Breeding Goals – Learn from the past to focus on the future”. The full programme and registration details will be available in early autumn.
Clive Brown, BCBC conference chairman, said the virtual conference provides a huge opportunity to access speakers and a wider audience from around the world.
