Thousands of people around the world hospitalized with COVID-19 have been treated with what’s known as convalescent plasma donated by people who’ve recovered from the infection.
Doctors hope to harness from that plasma the antibodies that donors have produced in response to the disease. The plasma is given to patients with the goal of helping them fight off the infection or preventing infection in the first place.
But a Sioux Falls, South Dakota, biotech firm thinks it has a better alternative to convalescent plasma: A barn full of dairy cattle that are producing human antibodies to COVID-19.
The company, SAb Biotherapeutics, plans to begin testing the antibodies in human trials yet this summer.
The cattle, a Holstein mix, look just like those found on many Midwestern farms. But they’re not your basic bovine. They’ve been genetically modified to have a partially human immune system.
The company then injects them with a noninfectious portion of the novel coronavirus so they produce antibodies to fight it. “We have already shown our antibodies neutralize the SARS-CoV-2 virus (the more technical name for the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19), and we have already produced a clinical material to be used for our clinical trials,” said Eddie Sullivan, the company’s president and CEO.
And, because they inject the cows over and over again, the animals build up high levels of those neutralizing antibodies, more than what’s found in convalescent plasma, he said.
A herd of genetically modified cattle in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, is making human antibodies that can neutralize the novel coronavirus. SAb Biotherapeutics plans to begin trials in humans this summer.
The company announced recently in a press release that the cow-made antibodies were four times better at blocking the virus from entering cells than the most potent convalescent plasma they studied.
William Klimstra, a viral immunologist at the University of Pittsburgh, tested the cow-made antibodies against convalescent plasma in cell cultures.
“In the cell culture models, we showed there was more neutralizing capacity in cow serum and antibody preparations than in convalescent serum,” said Klimstra, who has worked with SAb since 2012.
The research was shared by the company but has not been published in a scientific journal.
The cattle, Sullivan said, have a couple of other advantages over human donors. For one, cows are big animals and can produce a lot of plasma, donating 30 to 45 liters a month versus the 2 to 3 liters a human donor could supply.
The cattle also have a more robust immune response than humans, in order to keep their ruminant guts from being overrun by pathogens. The repeated injections bump up that response. And the cattle live in a controlled environment, unlike human plasma donors who come from different locations and may be exposed to all sorts of things.
The company’s technology, Sullivan said, also produces a polyclonal response, meaning the antibodies can bind to more than one site on the virus. Monoclonal antibodies, as the name suggests, can bind to only one.
Sullivan said the polyclonal response is important because the virus could mutate. “If a virus mutates on that place where a monoclonal antibody (binds), that monoclonal (antibody) is no longer functional,” he said.
It would be difficult, however, for a virus to mutate in so many places that polyclonal antibodies, actually a collection of molecules, would become ineffective, he said.
“The natural way our bodies fight disease is a polyclonal response,” said Sullivan, who has degrees in molecular biology and reproductive physiology.
Meantime, several monoclonal antibodies to the coronavirus also are expected to enter clinical trials this summer. According to a recent commentary in the Journal of the American Medical Association, those antibodies have been chosen to target a part of the virus that has held steady. Some products will include a combination of two monoclonal antibodies targeting different sites.
As coronavirus rules ease further, cases are falling, but Nebraska has 'not achieved containment'
In addition, another company, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, announced that it had started human trials with a drug derived from mice, CNN reported.
Such antibodies generally are viewed both as a potential treatment and a possible preventative, in lieu of a vaccine, to keep people from getting sick.
The technology behind SAb Biotherapeutics’ approach dates back nearly two decades. Since 2014, the company has produced antibodies to a number of infectious diseases, including Ebola, Zika and the original SARS, using cattle.
The company had completed a clinical trial in humans with antibodies against Middle East respiratory syndrome, which is caused by a coronavirus related to the novel coronavirus, and was proceeding toward a second phase of trials when the pandemic struck.
Those experiences gave the company a head start. The cows were producing antibodies to the novel coronavirus within seven weeks. The company has initial funding of $9.4 million through an existing federal contract to take the project through preclinical trials.
The company has been working with the Food and Drug Administration through the testing process and would eventually have to get approval from the agency, as would the makers of any new drug, before the product could be used on a wider scale in humans.
Sullivan said it’s rewarding to get to a point where the technology, which took years to develop, is being put to use and can perhaps have a significant impact on one of the most serious health threats in a lifetime.
“This is why SAb and our employees have worked so hard over the last few months,” he said. “I have an amazing, dedicated team of scientists and individuals who have been just absolutely focused on being able to move this forward.”
More than a hundred people gather for a vigil to remember James Scurlock. Tuesday marked one month since the shooting and killing of Scurlock, a 22-year-old black man, by Jake Gardner, a white bar owner, during a protest downtown.
More than a hundred people gather for a vigil to remember James Scurlock. Tuesday marked one month since the shooting and killing of Scurlock, a 22-year-old black man, by Jake Gardner, a white bar owner, during a protest downtown.
Lasha Goodwin, with the Global Leadership Group, picks up trash on North 24th Street in Omaha on Saturday, June 27, 2020. The North 24th Street Business Improvement District hosted the cleanup event with dozens of people picking up trash from Cuming to Meredith Streets.
A vigil left for James Scurlock near 13th and Harney St. in Omaha.
J.J. Greve does a flip as Ilan Perez takes a breather.
Protesters gather outside Cupcake Omaha in Omaha on Wednesday. They are calling on U.S. Senate candidate Chris Janicek, who owns the bakery, to step down from the race after a series of sexually inappropriate text messages he sent to members of his staff.
Trey Kobza can't quite catch up to this double in left during the Nebraska Prospects baseball camp at Werner Park on Tuesday, June 23, 2020.
Daric Heard of Bellevue, one of the organizers of the Juneteenth festival in Omaha.
Philip Brown performs as JbreedTheRebel with Entertainment during the Juneteenth Festival in Omaha.
A group prays during a Juneteenth prayer gathering on Friday in Omaha.
A red tailed hawk has taken residence as TD Ameritrade sits empty because of the coronavirus pandemic.
An oversized teddy bear sits at the front window of a house in Omaha last week.
A parking lot normally full of fans and vendors for the College World Series this time of years is empty as Omaha feels the economic impact from the cancellation of the tournament.
People walk along a trail around Wehrspann Lake at Chalco Hills Recreation Area in Omaha on Tuesday.
The sun shines over Hanscom Park in Omaha on Wednesday, June 17, 2020. The first half of June in Omaha was the second-hottest on record.
From top, Wendy Pfeifer, Julie Odermatt, Tonja Minardi and Amy Barth show their matching tattoos at Artists Unbound in Omaha. The mothers each lost a daughter, Addisyn, Kloe, Alex and Abby in a June 17, 2019, car crash. The wreck also severely injured a fifth girl. Each mother got a matching tattoo with four hearts to represent the four girls.
Margaret Miller paints her family’s home in Auburn, Neb., on Monday, June 15, 2020.
Johnson’s Gas-N-Go outside Union, Nebraska, in Cass County, has a message for COVID-19 that all Nebraskans can get behind.
A pride flag flies beneath a Union Pacific flag in front of the company’s headquarters in downtown Omaha on Monday.
Nikita Jackson blows bubbles during a Black Lives Matter Cookout at Benson Park on Saturday, June 13, 2020.
The Clanton family, from left: Todd, Lena, Ella, Mattie and LeAnn, get their photo taken by the kids's grandmother Marvetta Tate in front of Road to Omaha sculpture on Saturday, June 13, 2020. Saturday would have been the opening day of the College World Series. The Clantons are from Brandenburg, Kentucky and were on a road-trip and stopped by the sculpture.
Marchers walk east down Dodge Street towards Memorial park during a rally to remember James Scurlock on Sunday, June 07, 2020.
Omaha police push a woman out of the street as she was protesting at 72nd and Dodge Streets on Friday, May 29, 2020. People were protesting the death of George Floyd at the hands of Minneapolis police.
James Scurlock II hugs Nicole Myles at the Malcom X Memorial Foundation after talking to the media about the death of James's son James Scurlock, on Sunday, May 31, 2020. He was killed during a protest the night before by Jake Gardner.
Larry Duncan asks people to put their hands and theirs hearts up during a rally at the Malcolm X Memorial Foundation on Sunday, May 31, 2020.
A cat peers out of a burned house at 2853 Vane St., on Monday, June 01, 2020. One person died in the fire on Sunday. Damage was seen to two houses and a detached garage.
Law enforcement line up on the third night of protests in Omaha on Sunday, May 31, 2020. A protester was shot and killed Saturday night by a civilian. An 8 p.m. curfew went into effect Sunday, and the Nebraska National Guard was called in to assist with protests.
Tear gas is fired at protesters who used road closed signs as barricades looking south on 13th Street near Jones Street on the third day or protests on Sunday, May 31, 2020. They were protesting the death of George Floyd at the hands of Minneapolis police.
Protestors and law enforcement face-off on 13th Street in downtown Omaha on Sunday as the 8PM curfew nears.
A protester walks ahead of advancing law enforcement after the 8 p.m. curfew in downtown Omaha on Sunday.
A portrait of James Scurlock is held during a protest on Sunday in downtown Omaha. Scurlock was shot and killed late Saturday night during a protest in Omaha.
A man is arrested on 13th Street in Omaha after the 8 p.m. curfew on Sunday.
Tear gas canisters land near protestors on 13th Street in Omaha on Sunday after the 8 p.m. curfew.
Law enforcement officers turn vehicles away from downtown Omaha on Sunday after the 8 p.m. curfew.
People protest for the fourth day in a row in Omaha on Monday, June 01, 2020. It was announced Monday that the bar owner who shot and killed James Scurlock amid a protest on Saturday will face no charges.
A crowd demonstrate at 13th and Howard Streets during a fourth day of protests in Omaha on Monday, June 01, 2020.
People watch the police response from the roof the of the Paxton building during a fourth day of protests in Omaha on Monday, June 01, 2020.
A flower on a sidewalk as National Guard troops and Omaha police stand at the corner of 13th and Howard in downtown Omaha on Monday.
A group chants for James Scurlock during a demonstration on Tuesday at City Hall in downtown Omaha.
Flowers rest on a traffic barrel blocking off 14th Street on Tuesday in Omaha.
Iggy holds a sign on Tuesday in downtown Omaha with the final words of several black men and women who were killed by police.
Sydnee Harris, of Omaha, and dozens of others protest outside the Omaha Douglas Civic Center in Omaha on Wednesday, June 03, 2020.
Sen. Ernie Chambers speaks to dozens of people protesting outside the Omaha Douglas Civic Center in Omaha on Wednesday, June 03, 2020.
Tyreece Johnson, of Omaha, and dozens of other people march from the Omaha Douglas Civic Center to the Old Market in Omaha on Wednesday, June 03, 2020. James Scurlock, a 22-year-old black man, was shot and killed in the Old Market on Saturday night by a white bar owner.
Nicole Baker helps her two-year-old son Atlas Ebel paint in the letters on a mural of James Scurlock on the side of Culprit Cafe & Bakery at 1603 Farnam St. on Thursday, June 04, 2020.
Hundreds of people attend a vigil and march to remember Zachary BearHeels ending at 60th and Center in Omaha on Friday, June 05, 2020. BearHeels died three years ago after being tased by Omaha Police officers.
People cheer at Memorial park during a rally to remember James Scurlock on Sunday, June 07, 2020.
Marchers walk east down Dodge Street towards Memorial park during a rally to remember James Scurlock on Sunday, June 07, 2020.
A crowd moves along Dodge Street on a march to Memorial Park for a solidarity rally on Sunday in Omaha.
A woman holds a "History has its eyes on you" sign while marching up the hill at Memorial Park for a solidarity rally on Sunday in Omaha.
Terrell McKinney, Leo Louis II and J Shannon hold their fists in the air with the crowd during a solidarity rally on Sunday at Memorial Park in Omaha.
James Scurlock II salutes the crowd during a solidarity rally on Sunday at Memorial Park in Omaha.
People watch the elephants at the Omaha's Henry Doorly Zoo & Aquarium in Omaha on Sunday, June 07, 2020.This was the first weekend the zoo reopened to guests after closing amid the novel coronavirus pandemic.
Paige Reitz sets Black Lives Matter posters on the floor of the Wanda D. Ewing Gallery for people to pick up at The Union For Contemporary Art on Wednesday, June 03, 2020.
A rainbow appears over a farm field east of Tecumseh, Nebraska after severe storms blew through the area on Tuesday, June 09, 2020.
Bear Drinkall, 5, of Omaha, plays at the Westwood Heights Park splash pad in Omaha on Thursday, June 11, 2020.
