The Milton farmer asked a stock and station agent to buy 176 cattle and arrange grazing for them. They then disappeared.
The High Court has ordered a stock and station agency pay $272,867 to a South Otago farmer after cattle he bought disappeared and have never been located.
Justice Gerald Nation said the case suggested traditional "handshake deals" should now be consigned to history.
In 2015, Milton farmer Jasper Clark bought 176 artificially bred in-calf heifers through stock and station agent John Williams of Rural Livestock.
Instead of placing the animals on his farm, Clark arranged through Williams that the cattle would be grazed out on "free" leases on two farms, one in Balclutha, the other in Mid-Canterbury.
Williams had them transported but never provided information to Clark about the identity of the stock so they could be traced.
"The plaintiffs have thus paid for the stock but have never obtained possession of them and have therefore not received what they paid for," the judge said.
Rural Livestock denied liability for Clark's losses, arguing it was a matter between the lessees grazing the cattle and Clark.
They argued that Williams had arranged the leases in a personal capacity and not as an agent for Rural Livestock, and also claimed any loss was due to, or at least was contributed to by the negligence or recklessness of Clark.
Appearing for the plaintiff, livestock agent Terence Cairns said the duties of the stock agent and his company would normally include recording the full details of livestock purchased, arranging leases, and recording the full details of livestock sold.
General manager livestock of Rural Livestock, Simon Cox, said it was not the company's responsibility to hold detailed information, such as the livestock tracing tagging system NAIT, of stock bought and sold.
Cox told the court of concerns the company had over transactions involving Williams. He said they suspected that the "N Giers", who was apparently the lessee of 90 of the 176 in-calf heifers, probably never existed and was instead a fictitious person invented by Williams.
Cox said that he considered Mr Williams had been involved in a number of irregular transactions for a small number of clients with whom he had been involved. However Rural Livestock's systems and management had "inadvertently" allowed these to occur unnoticed.
Williams said he was constrained in what he could reveal because of a Serious Fraud Office investigation into the matter,  but that he was able to say the stock leased to a Mr Greers or Giers in Canterbury had ultimately "gone north".
The court found Rural Livestock did not establish Clark was negligent.
"He had a history of dealings with both Mr Williams and Rural where he had relied on Mr Williams to purchase stock for him, sight unseen. With his previous dealings, there was no reason why he should have distrusted Mr Williams on this occasion."
Although Clark claimed $344,000, Justice Nation awarded him a lesser sum of $272,867, with interest of 5 per cent from August 1, 2015, being paid on a large percentage of the sum.
