COVID-19 hits Michigan farmers hard, with some facing prospect of killing livestock
Michigan farmers had already struggled with low prices and uncooperative weather. Then the coronavirus came and made things worse.
Bob Dykhuis and his family have bought a little time. Only a little.
Dykhuis is the founder and patriarch of Dykhuis Farms Inc., a hog farm in Hamilton in Allegan County he runs with his five children and their spouses. From a small family farm 40 years ago, the operation has expanded to farms throughout southwest Michigan and northern Indiana, raising almost a half-million pigs a year.
Seeing the looming storm of coronavirus spreading out of China late this winter, the farm worked to "get its weight down," Dykhuis said — ramping up the number of adult pigs it was sending to slaughter, in anticipation of potential problems later.
For agriculture generally, and pork farmers in particular, those problems have arrived.
Lost demand with the closure or significant slowdown of restaurants, and COVID-19 outbreaks at meat packing plants nationwide, where employees work closely together, have slowed meat processing to a trickle.
Michigan Farmers Matt DeBlouw, of Mike Pirrone Produce and Ken Nobis, of Nobis Dairy Farms talk about how the spread of COVID-19 has affected their farms
President Donald Trump this week declared the meat processing plants essential and ordered them to remain open. But whether employees fearful of contracting coronavirus in the hot spots for infection will report for work remains to be seen.
"We're a supplier to Tyson Foods in Logansport, Indiana ," Dykhuis said. "We're normally running 55 to 60 semi-loads of pigs to their processing plant in an average week. Last week, we had seven loads. This week, six."
From lost markets, to growers who don't know whether they have a buyer for the fall vegetables they're planting now, to farmers ready to harvest but not knowing whether enough migrant workers will be coming to pick the crops, the coronavirus pandemic is cutting a wide swath of hardship across agriculture, Michigan's third biggest economic sector after manufacturing and tourism.
And non-farming Michigan residents will feel it, too, beyond empty supermarket shelves.
The food and agriculture industry contributes $104.7 billion annually to the state economy, according to the Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development. The sector employs more than 800,000 Michigan residents, 17% of the state's workforce.
Among farmers, those raising livestock, including for dairy, have the greatest economic impact in Michigan, at $5.13 billion, according to MDARD.  Field crops aren't far behind at $5.12 billion.
Coronavirus impacts are a more immediately acute problem for pork farmers because of the nature of hog-raising compared with other meats. Chickens raised for meat take only about eight to 12 weeks before going to the slaughter, giving producers more flexibility to make changes. Beef cattle take a year and a half, but producers typically have more flexibility to hold cows on their farms than pork producers do. A sow is pregnant with her litter for about four months, the baby pigs take about three weeks for weaning off their mother's milk, and then a young pig takes about six months to reach slaughtering age.
Without the outlet of a processing plant for the endless conveyor belt of life on a hog farm, hogs ready for slaughter keep eating and growing, taking up limited space and resources. In fact, Dykhuis said, they'll grow up to 350 pounds or more, at which time they are literally too large to move through a slaughterhouse, rendering all of the money spent on feeding and raising them worse than worthless, but a cost liability.
Hog farmers in other parts of the country, facing the same plight as Dykhuis, have begun euthanizing their pigs — simply killing them to throw them away. Dykhuis figures he has four weeks before that becomes his reality — if he can ship at least 10 truckloads of pigs to slaughter per week.
Bob Dykhuis, founder and chairman of Dykhuis Farms Inc. in Allegan County, stands amid the pigs raised on his farm in this April 30, 2020... Bob Dykhuis, founder and chairman of Dykhuis Farms Inc. in Allegan County, stands amid the pigs raised on his farm in this April 30, 2020 photo. The coronavirus pandemic, and resulting reductions in meat processing capability, may force Dykhuis within a month to begin euthanizing pigs that can't be taken to slaughter, he said.
"You don't have room for the little pigs," he said. "Guys have been euthanizing the weaned pigs," young pigs just off of their mother's milk but not yet ready for slaughter, "because they're not worth anything and the farms have so little space. That's really emotionally draining. Now they're trying to get ahead and have the sows abort their (unborn) litter before they have the weaning pigs."
At a time when the coronavirus is decimating the economy, with huge numbers of people out of work and causing demand at food banks to skyrocket, vegetable and dairy farmers are contributing more to help meet the need. But the meat hog farmers might have to throw away can’t help if it can’t be processed.
"All you can do is destroy them," Dykhuis said. "It's all waste, then. You either have to compost them, or take them to a landfill, which is expensive. It's terrible."
Trump's executive order declaring meat processing plants as critical infrastructure during the COVID-19 national emergency, orders the plants to remain operating. The order is also intended to alleviate any liability meat-packing plants may eventually face from employee lawsuits.
That should help, Dykhuis said. But he noted that at some processing plants, hundreds of workers have contracted COVID-19 .
"The biggest problem is getting people who aren't sick to show up because they are afraid of getting sick," he said. "You still have to get to the point where people feel comfortable to come to work. They say the plant has to stay open, but the people are not coming in to work."
It's a problem facing beef and poultry farmers, too, said MDARD director Gary McDowell.
Gary McDowell, director of the Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development.
"You're going to have to dispose of these animals, one way or another," he said. "If the slaughterhouse can't take them, the farmer can't continue to hold on to animals they can't sell."
"We're not there yet (in Michigan), but it could be fairly soon. It could really become a problem."
The U.S. Department of Agriculture has announced $16 billion in immediate relief for farmers, and another $3 billion to purchase produce, dairy and meat for stocking food banks.
With coronavirus putting huge numbers of people out of work, food banks "are in desperate need at this time — about four times the normal need," McDowell said. "That (federal purchasing program) is going to be a big help."
Tyson Foods Chairman John Tyson warned, "The food supply chain is breaking," in a recent full-page ad in the New York Times and other major publications. Tyson days earlier shut down its large pork processing plant in Waterloo, Iowa, after several workers contracted COVID-19.
Large meat-packing facilities in Green Bay, Wisconsin , and South Dakota were also closed at least temporarily after outbreaks of COVID-19 swept through employees working closely to one another in the plants.
The USDA on April 24 announced it was establishing a National Incident Coordination Center to provide direct support to livestock farmers impacted by processing plant closures because of COVID-19.
The center, working with state veterinarians and other officials, will "help identify potential alternative markets if a producer is unable to move animals, and if necessary, advise and assist on depopulation and disposal methods."
McDowell said MDARD and USDA are in "constant contact" with meat processors, working on ways to "help give them protection and the testing they need to help keep the workers safe and coming to work every day."
Shoppers can help ensure Michigan's meat supplies stay sufficient.
"We have determined that with production facilities continuing to function and plenty of meat in cold storage around the state, consumers should expect to continue to see meat products in grocery stores," Mary Kelpinski, chief executive officer of the Michigan Pork Producers Association, said in a statement Saturday. "The only way we could encounter a problem is if consumers start panic-buying. We want everyone to know that production in Michigan remains strong. Don’t buy more than you need."
There's one shred of good news for dairy farmers amid COVID-19: The amount of milk being sold in supermarkets is up, with so many people under stay-at-home orders.
But that's more than washed over by all the bad news: the loss of restaurant, school and foreign markets for dairy products.
Guadalupe Flores, 23, of Ionia is a milker at Nobis Dairy Farm in St. Johns, Mich. and chats with Co-owner Ken Nobis, while working on... Guadalupe Flores, 23, of Ionia is a milker at Nobis Dairy Farm in St. Johns, Mich. and chats with Co-owner Ken Nobis, while working on Friday, April 24, 2020. Nobis Dairy Farm has 1,100 milk cows and also grows both feed for the cattle and some soybeans and corn on 3,000 acres in St. John, Mich. Cows eat a balanced combination of forage, grain, mineral supplements and protein-rich feeds such as soybean meal. With the glut of milk driving down prices, that were already depressed before coronavirus, Nobis Dairy Farm will be making expensive purchases for seed and fertilizer for their cattle feed crops in the next couple of months. "The hole just keeps getting deeper and it gets harder to climb out of it," he said
Fifty percent of the butter that's produced in the domestic market goes to the food service industry — restaurants, said Joe Diglio, president and CEO of the Michigan Milk Producers Association, a milk marketing and processing cooperative owned by dairy farmers in Michigan, Indiana, Ohio and Wisconsin.
"Because dairy is produced every single day off the farm, and it's very perishable, you need to have an outlet," he said.
"With a major outlet, food service, being closed or greatly curtailed, there's a big imbalance — more supply than demand opportunities out there."
Michigan milk farmers typically export about 15% of their dairy products to other countries, Diglio said.
"When you have borders that are basically closed, based on countries that are taking health precautions similar to the U.S., you're putting even more product on the domestic market, further reducing value," he said.
There's a time lag from when prices go down and when farmers begin feeling it, said Ken Nobis, who milks 1,100 cows on a family dairy farm in St. Johns.
"March milk had a price decline, and in April and May we're going to have a much larger decline," he said. "The cash really starts disappearing in the next two months."
Nobis grows his own feed for his cows, on about 3,000 acres of farmland.
The cash really starts disappearing in the next two months.
"This is the time of year you need the money for seed and fertilizing for the food you need to feed those cows all year long," he said.
It's happening as dairy farmers have already struggled for years with low prices because of an overabundance of milk on the global market.
"Two months ago, we were looking forward to 2020 being a year where we actually, finally, made a little bit of money — did better than break even," Nobis said. "Then the virus knocked that out from under us."
The longer the impacts of the virus continue, the deeper the hole from which dairy farmers must climb.
Nobis Dairy Farm has 1,100 milk cows and also grows both feed for the cattle and some soybeans and corn on 3,000 acres in St. John, Mich. Cows eat a balanced combination of forage, grain, mineral supplements and protein-rich feeds such as soybean meal. With the glut of milk driving down prices, that were already depressed before coronavirus, Nobis Dairy Farm will be making expensive purchases for seed and fertilizer for their cattle feed crops in the next couple of months. "The hole just keeps getting deeper and it gets harder to climb out of it," he said. Nobis Dairy Farm has 1,100 milk cows and also grows both feed for the cattle and some soybeans and corn on 3,000 acres in St. John, Mich. Cows eat a balanced combination of forage, grain, mineral supplements and protein-rich feeds such as soybean meal. With the glut of milk driving down prices, that were already depressed before coronavirus, Nobis Dairy Farm will be making expensive purchases for seed and fertilizer for their cattle feed crops in the next couple of months. "The hole just keeps getting deeper and it gets harder to climb out of it," he said. Nobis Dairy Farm has 1,100 milk cows and also grows both feed for the cattle and some soybeans and corn on 3,000 acres in St. John, Mich. Cows eat a balanced combination of forage, grain, mineral supplements and protein-rich feeds such as soybean meal. With the glut of milk driving down prices, that were already depressed before coronavirus, Nobis Dairy Farm will be making expensive purchases for seed and fertilizer for their cattle feed crops in the next couple of months. "The hole just keeps getting deeper and it gets harder to climb out of it," he said. Kimberly P. Mitchell, Detroit Free Press
"You can't turn that cow off, like you can shut a factory off if you have to — turn out the lights, lock the doors, walk away, come back, open the factory back up and start again," Nobis said. "That cow has to be milked twice a day. You have to keep feeding her."
It's causing some farmers to have to dump tens of thousands of gallons of milk down the drain every day.
Farmers desperately need more funding from the federal government, both Nobis and Diglio said.
"If there's not a quick fix, you will see dairy farmers going out of business," he said.
And that will have ripple effects, Nobis said.
"When we come back to normal times, maybe we don't have enough milk to meet demand," he said.
To plant or not to plant?
Matt DeBlouw, president of Mike Perrone Produce in Capac, grows vegetables on about 1,500 acres of his farm, and works with 30 different growers throughout the Great Lakes region to supply supermarket chains such as Kroger, Meijer and Walmart.
On DeBlouw's farm, they're picking rhubarb grown indoors — and hoping the store chains will want it.
Matt DeBlouw is president of Mike Pirrone produce, a 1,200-arce farm there in Capac, Mich, and is photographed at an organic kale field where they... Matt DeBlouw is president of Mike Pirrone produce, a 1,200-arce farm there in Capac, Mich, and is photographed at an organic kale field where they are planting on Tuesday, April 28, 2020. Mike Pirrone Produce is a part of a network of farmers throughout the Great Lakes region that supply veggies to places like Kroger, Walmart, Meijer. DeBlouw says supermarkets are now more focused on vital, longer-lasting produce such as potatoes, onions and carrots and he and his fellow farmers have to plant now and hope in the fall they'll have a market for their products.
"What they want are the core items — the potatoes, things that will last — that people can store and will eat every day," he said.
"The scary part is the future. What's going to happen in coming months? The retail side, they're scared about setting up contracts, telling farmers they will commit to taking their products."
But for DeBlouw, the die already has been cast.
"I bought seed two months ago," he said. "I'm going to be putting stuff into the ground next week into next month. And I don't know whether there's going to be a market for it come late summer and fall."
Michigan ranks first in the nation for asparagus production, generating up to 23 million pounds a year. It's one of the state's earliest crops to come in, and is ready for picking around now, McDowell said.
"And right now, they're still looking to make sure they're going to have labor to get that product up," he said.
Migrant workers coming north from Texas and Florida, and foreign workers coming from Mexico and Central America, remain vital to the state's and nation's agriculture, McDowell said.
"There's just a lot of uncertainty out there, whether to come to Michigan," he said. "If it wasn't for the migrant workers and the foreign workers, our food supply chain would collapse in this country. We are so reliant upon these people."
With groceries, schools and others unsure of what food commodities they'll be needing in the months ahead, a ripple effect is created, said MDARD Deputy Director James Averill.
"So the farmer is making decisions: 'Do I raise as many animals? Do I plant as many crops?' " he said. "If they start making decisions to cut back, that's going to lead to, down the road, whether it's three months or 18 months, depending on the commodity ... some shortages or increased prices to the consumer's pocketbook."
McDowell noted that immediate relief for farmers is based on actual losses already incurred by agricultural producers impacted by COVID-19.
"A lot of our farmers in Michigan, we have so many specialty crops that haven't even come in yet," he said. "Right now, in the relief package that was put out, they're not included in that because they haven't had the losses yet."
One of DeBlouw's key crops every year is pumpkins and heart squash for around Halloween. They're planted in May or June, and harvested in the fall.
Theresa Boering, 34, of Yale has worked at Mike Pirrone Produce for 18 years and helps pick rhubarb alongside Cassaundra Fielitz, 32, of Capac and other workers at the 1,200-arce farm in Capac, Mich., photographed on Tuesday, April 28, 2019. A network of farmers throughout the Great Lakes region supply veggies to places like Kroger, Walmart, Meijer, but the supermarkets are now more focused on vital, longer-lasting produce such as potatoes, onions and carrots. The expenditure for the rhubarb has already been made so It must be harvested and sold. Theresa Boering, 34, of Yale has worked at Mike Pirrone Produce for 18 years and helps pick rhubarb alongside Cassaundra Fielitz, 32, of Capac and other workers at the 1,200-arce farm in Capac, Mich., photographed on Tuesday, April 28, 2019. A network of farmers throughout the Great Lakes region supply veggies to places like Kroger, Walmart, Meijer, but the supermarkets are now more focused on vital, longer-lasting produce such as potatoes, onions and carrots. The expenditure for the rhubarb has already been made so It must be harvested and sold. Theresa Boering, 34, of Yale has worked at Mike Pirrone Produce for 18 years and helps pick rhubarb alongside Cassaundra Fielitz, 32, of Capac and other workers at the 1,200-arce farm in Capac, Mich., photographed on Tuesday, April 28, 2019. A network of farmers throughout the Great Lakes region supply veggies to places like Kroger, Walmart, Meijer, but the supermarkets are now more focused on vital, longer-lasting produce such as potatoes, onions and carrots. The expenditure for the rhubarb has already been made so It must be harvested and sold. Kimberly P. Mitchell, Detroit Free Press
But will there be a normal Halloween this fall, with normal Halloween pumpkin and squash demands? DeBlouw is largely operating on faith.
"I hope what we're doing, the social distancing, will allow us to get back to a normal life," he said. "I suspect Halloween will be the first major holiday where people can get back together."
Farmers have gotten through terrible weather and terrible markets in the past, and they will get through this pandemic, Nobis said.
"People are down in the mouth right now — it's understandable," he said. "But the producers are still going out here every day. They're milking their cows. They're treating them as well as they did before. They understand the issues, as far as the virus being a risk. But everybody's coming to work and doing their job.
"I'm more proud of the dairy industry than I've ever been, and I was pretty proud of it before all this."
