Cow hugging even has a name in the Netherlands—koe knuffelen—and it’s spreading through the United States.
Hi, my angels! You in your house?” Ellie Laks calls, boots squishing through puddled mud. Five placid steers look up as she enters the barn. They’re the remaining five of the St. Louis Six; one died shortly after their legendary escape from a slaughterhouse.
“This is Chico,” Laks says. “He’s the one who led everybody through three fences to safety.” Initially wary, Chico has come to trust this new sort of human being. “Now the only place he leads them is to good grass,” Laks says, grinning.
White-faced Houdini, on the other hand, was curious about Laks in the beginning, “and Chico was, like, No. He used his neck to stop him. So Houdini was the last to trust us; even after Chico did, he was, like, No, Chico said no. He was the last to let us touch him.”
That touching took a long time, by design. “All humans had been cruel to them,” explains Laks, “so we had to be different. Even loading up, we didn’t hurry them; we just opened the trailer door and invited them to go in. For the first six months, we had volunteers with them every day in the pasture.”
As a species, cattle are affectionate and family-centric, she says, but we rarely see that, because we break up those families and make food of them. In the dairy industry, babies are immediately taken from their mothers. But Laks, whose nonprofit Gentle Barn now has rescue farms near Los Angeles, Nashville, and St. Louis, has watched birth rituals that enchanted her: “They nurse their babies for years. They babysit each other’s babies. The whole family, which includes aunties and uncles, participates when a baby is born.”
When Laks rescued a cow who turned out to be pregnant, 20 cattle formed a circle around the cow as she labored. They watched her clean and dry her calf, which then wobbled to his feet. “It took two hours, and not one of those cows moved,” Laks says. “Once the baby had drunk his fill and fallen asleep, they broke the circle and formed a single-file line, matriarchs and elders first. One by one, they licked him and smelled him and introduced themselves. Then my husband, children, and I took our turn, and we all sat under the moonlight and watched the baby sleep.”
They also have a ritual for death, she says, forming the same circle to say goodbye. “When the herd went off to dinner, one stayed with the cow who was dying, and they took turns, 20-minute shifts, until the vet arrived.” She strokes Chico. “There is so much about cows we don’t know. After she died, they were listless, not vibrant and playful. They’d sit around and mope, didn’t want their bouncy walls, wouldn’t run for bedtime cookies like they used to. A few months later, they started to interact again. They feel heartbreak just like we do, and they recover with time, like we do.”
Squatting, she drapes one arm across Chico’s broad back and leans against his warmth. “It’s different than hugging a dog,” she says, “because of their massive size. They could hurt you if they wanted to; you’re not in control.” She urges me to try, and I stroke Houdini’s white cheek, scratch his neck and back. When I stop, he leans against me, a prompt to continue that near knocks me off balance.
Cow hugging even has a name in the Netherlands—koe knuffelen—and it’s spreading through the United States. “The trend started 20 years ago, when I opened the Gentle Barn,” Laks says. “My first cow, Buddha—every time I was sad, I’d lean against her, and she would wrap her neck around me and hold me. It was so transformative, I had everyone who visited do it. We work with some tough characters, shut-down and angry.”
Programs bring kids in foster care, teens who’ve gotten in trouble with the law or addicted to drugs. “I’d welcome them to hug Buddha, and the minute their faces went down against her shoulder, those hard, cold, defensive kids would melt into little boys.”
The barn’s Peace Enhancement Program runs September through June. “If someone thinks they’re bad, unwanted, and unlovable, no amount of interaction’s going to help them until they change that point of view,” Laks says. “With these animals, they get a chance to practice gentleness, to cultivate empathy, to be thoughtful and considerate.”
They also get to giggle at Jemima Puddle-Duck and the frisky goats, and groom or walk the donkeys. “With a horse or donkey, there are never two equals,” Laks explains. “There’s always a leader and a follower. So we help them practice: Head up, shoulders back, be in the present moment, look where you’re going, keep your energy forward—and then the animal will follow you. If you’re distracted or not very confident, the animal will lead you.” She chuckles. “If the kids are being funny or a show-off or cool or fake in any way, the animals will have nothing to do with them. The minute they get centered and real, the animals want to be with them.”
When volunteers read to the new rescues, hold them, or sing to them, “they’re helping heal the animals, and in doing so, they heal themselves. So these guys”—she gestures to the steers—“have a big job to do. They went through their own PTSD—they had to learn to forgive, to be brave, to trust—and now they’re on the other side. Keep going. You’ll end up OK.”
