Bailey Dyson with her mule and the state FFA Diversified Livestock Production award.
The Davie County FFA Chapter was recognized as a National Chapter Finalist – Gold Level during the during the NC FFA virtual celebration, June 16-18.
This award is designed to recognize FFA chapters that have excelled during the current year in the areas of growing leaders, building communities, and strengthening agriculture.
Chapters must submit an extensive application outlining activities, goals, means to accomplish those goals as well as the actual outcomes. This application will go on to compete for national honors at the National FFA Convention in Indianapolis, Ind. in October.
Hunter Leroy was recognized for earning the Old North State FFA Degree. Hunter also received the DEKALB Agricultural Accomplishment Award for the chapter.
Hunter has been in the FFA for the last four years and is serving as the chapter president. Hunter has participated in tractor and truck driving competitions, forestry career development events, community service activities as well as FFA Camp at White Lake.
“As an FFA officer, Hunter has played a major role in daily responsibilities as well as taking on major leadership roles,” said Davie High FFA advisor, Jesse Ledbetter. “A big part of his success is the work he has put into his SAE (Supervised Agriculture Experience) at Tractor Supply. I am proud to have had Hunter as a student and FFA member. “
Hunter will attend NC State University in the fall.
The Diversified Livestock Production award area involves the use of best management strategies available to efficiently produce and market a combination of animals. Participants are graded on an application that requires extensive record keeping and good agricultural practices. In this area Bailey Dyson received first place in the state.
Bailey raises longhorn cattle, sheep, turkeys and a mule. One of her greatest accomplishments is first place at the Yadkin-Davie 4H show.
Find out more about the FFA at NCFFA.org.
