In the week ending 13 June, deadweight cattle prices recorded another strong week, as competition for supplies remained robust.
The GB all-prime average price rose 5.4p on the week to 358.4p/kg. The price is now 19.5p/kg higher than last year, and 12.3p above the five-year average.
Prime slaughter in British abattoirs was estimated at 34,700 head, virtually unchanged on the week, but up 1,300 head on the year.
Prime price movements for the week ending 13 June:
The average deadweight cow price rose by 4.9p on the week to 256.5p/kg overall. This puts the price 21.5p higher than the same point last year, and 17.0p above the five-year average.
Cows of O4L spec rose 1.8p to average 270.0p/kg. Estimated cow slaughter stood at 12,400 head for the week, up just under 450 head on the week before, but up 2,400 head on the year.
Market reports suggest that producers may be looking to sell more animals to try and ease pressure on grass growth, and that demand is there to support prices at present. Good weather has supported beef retail sales, while increasing foodservice demand has also contributed.
A key watchpoint will be how Irish production recovers and affects GB prices as lockdown is lifted. Irish production is beginning to increase, following slaughter restrictions due to COVID-19. If this beef enters the UK market, it could begin to pressure prices.
You can subscribe to receive Beef and Lamb market news straight to your inbox. Simply fill in your contact details on our online form.
The UK wheat crop is expected to be smaller year-on-year, with UK crop conditions now varying across regions.
After several weeks of sharp rises, GB cattle prices were largely steady this week.
The drought in Australia has ended, and cattle farmers there are now looking to restock which limit production this year.
The post-coronavirus recovery of Ireland’s beef throughputs could cast uncertainty over GB prices.
Prime cattle supplies have picked up slightly, attracted by the higher prices, but also perhaps by farmers looking to take the pressure off available grazing.
In April, both UK imports and exports of fresh/frozen beef fell 15% year-on-year.
Overall the disruption and uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to continue for many more months. For a second consecutive year, global meat production is expected to contract.
Deadweight cattle prices continued to climb during the week ending 13 June.
UK beef and veal production in May totalled 67,700 tonnes, down 13% year-on-year.
The lack of rainfall, particularly across England and Wales, has started to seriously restrict grass growth.
The GB all-prime average price rose 8p in the week ending 6 June to 353.0p/kg.
Beef production in the EU was down 0.4% in March compared to the previous year.
Red meat demand appears to have bounced back and is now overall slightly up year-on-year. Beef and pork have both recorded growth, while lamb is steady.
Across the board GB deadweight cattle prices have continued on an upwards trend. During the week ending 30 May, the all-prime average measure increased 7.5p week-on-week.
The GB cattle population at 1 April 2020 was smaller than at the same point in 2019, according to data from British Cattle Movement Service. The total number of cattle under 30 months was back by around 74,500 head.
The UK retail market currently prices mince and top cuts slightly differently than other countries, including those operating in the global beef market.
There have been many significant challenges in the US beef market since March.
The continued lack of significant rainfall in the UK has raised concerns for the quality of the quality of the planted crop.
The all-prime GB average price rose 7.7p on the week, to average 337.6p/kg.
