Images of fleeing kangaroos and dehydrated koalas have captured the world's attention during Australia's bushfire crisis — but heartbreaking photos of perished livestock paint an equally devastating picture.
Their carcasses are scattered across fire-devastated communities, with agricultural body Agforce saying there are biosecurity and health reasons to dispose of them as soon as possible
In fire-scorched Batlow, New South Wales, animal carcasses line the sides of the road, with farmers beginning the slow, difficult and grim work of loading the bodies onto the trays of utes.
Most are sheep and cattle held on surrounding properties. Most are clumped together, their bodies blackened.
Farmers said they were as prepared for the fire as they could be, and while some animals had survived, they could not save them all.
With stock losses likely to reach into tens of thousands, and public health and biosecurity risks to consider, logistical arrangements for the removal of carcasses are being factored into recovery efforts.
Graphic content warning: this article contains images that may distress some readers.
A lone sheep lies dead near Batlow, NSW.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison this morning announced the establishment of a national bushfire recovery agency led by former AFP Commissioner Andrew Colvin and reporting to Minister for Emergency Management David Littleproud.
Follow our live blog for the latest updates on bushfires.
"In many rural areas, [there are] fences to be rebuilt and carcasses of animals to be removed who have been caught in these fires," Mr Morrison said.
"That is a fairly grisly operation, but that needs to be done, and it needs to be done as soon as possible."
Two sheep, burnt but still alive, seem stunned at the charred landscape around them.
Michael Guerin, chief executive officer of peak agricultural body Agforce, called for the Government to implement a similar response to the effort following the 2019 Townsville floods, during which 664,000 head of stock were lost.
"We would like to acknowledge the Federal Government and the Prime Minister's words about recognising this has to be a coordinated response, with support for farmers who can't do it on their own," he said.
"If we don't deal with it quickly, we are facing health and safety issues, disease issues, biosecurity issues, which … puts an amazing industry at risk if we don't do it properly."
According to the NSW Department of Primary Industries (DPI), some 2,900 head of livestock have so far been confirmed deceased across 13,000 properties believed to have been impacted by fires across the state.
"This number includes approximately 700 stock killed or euthanised as a result of fires in the Northern Tablelands, North Coast and Hunter areas before Christmas," a DPI spokesperson said.
"Approximately 400 stock are estimated to have been killed or euthanised as a result of fires around the Lithgow and Bathurst areas over the Christmas and New Year period.
"Stock losses as a result of fires in south-east NSW since Christmas have been higher, with approximately 1,800 stock killed or euthanised to date.
"However, limited access to firegrounds and loss of power and phones in the area mean the full picture of losses and damage will take some time to emerge.
Mr Guerin said the Federal Government worked well with industry following the Townsville floods and he was confident a similar model would be followed.
He said he expected the Defence Force would be brought in to assist with recovery efforts.
"Bringing in the military is an incredibly positive thing, and they worked very well with us last time this happened, which was in North Queensland," he said.
Dozens of dead livestock on the side of the road, outside Batlow.
"Some producers are just emotionally unable to have the strength to get out there and to be finding the places to bury them, to be digging the holes.
"Recognising that some farmers are unable to [bury carcasses] for either emotional reasons or if there's many hundreds of them spread across a lot of land, just physically unable to do it all themselves."
He said there were a number of public health and biosecurity risks to rotting carcasses, and disposing of the bodies needed to be a priority.
"Rotting animals on the road — not only do they smell, but they attract infection and disease, and if [that] gets out of control, [it's] very hard to rein in," he said.
"Australia has an incredibly strong and good agricultural industry, and part of the reason for it is because of the biosecurity strengths we have.
"So the way we deal with this will be very important, not only for domestic consumers of food, but for international markets to see that when we face these challenges, we respect the needs of strong biosecurity, so that they can have confidence to continue to buy food from from Australia."
Stay across our bushfire coverage:
