Steve Shipton puts down a cow that was severely wounded after a bushfire ravaged a paddock in Coolagolite, New South Wales (Picture: EPA)
Heartbreaking images show the moment a farmer had to shoot his own cattle dead.
They were severely burned in wildfires sweeping across Australia, including his town of Coolagolite on the south coast of New South Wales.
Steve Shipton had to shoot 20 of his cows.
Pictures show him checking the cattle for burns and speaking to a vet.
They also show him being consoled by fellow farmers Bernie Smith and Peter Mercieca.
After he killed the animals, he shook hands with the vet.
Carcasses of cows killed in a bushfire lay in a field in Coolagolite (Picture: EPA)
Steve Shipton (centre) is consoled by fellow farmers Bernie Smith (left) and Peter Mercieca in Coolagolite (Picture: AAP)
Steve inspects the burn injuries on a cow he put down (Picture: EPA)
Images show the cattle lying dead on the ground in a charred landscape.
It comes as fires have ravaged Australia, sending so much smoke into the air that it has reached New Zealand.
Bushfires have destroyed more than 4 million hectares and new blazes are sparked almost daily by extremely hot and windy conditions and, most recently, dry lightning strikes created by the fires themselves.
Cooler conditions on Wednesday gave the country a moment to count the cost of the fires, although there were still more than 100 blazes in New South Wales (NSW) state alone and thousands of firefighters on the ground.
The body of a man was found in a burnt car early on Wednesday on the south coast of New South Wales after emergency workers began reaching the most damaged areas, and police said the death toll will rise.
‘Sadly, we can report today that police have confirmed a further three deaths as a result of the fires on the South Coast,’ NSW Police Deputy Commissioner Gary Worboys told reporters in Sydney.
The rubble of buildings sits on the ground after they were destroyed by fire in Cobargo, New South Wales (Picture: EPA)
‘Police are also at Lake Conjola now, where a house has been destroyed by fire and the occupant of that home is still unaccounted for.’
NSW police did not identify the missing man but said he was 72 years old and authorities have been unable to reach his home.
Police said early assessments have found nearly 200 homes have been destroyed, though they cautioned it was an early estimate.
In Victoria state, four people remain missing, state Premier Daniel Andrews said, after a massive blaze ripped through Gippsland – a rural region about 310 miles east of Melbourne.
About 4,000 people in the town of Mallacoota in Victoria headed to the waterfront after the main road was cut off.
Buildings destroyed by fire are seen in Cobargo (Picture: AAP)
Mark Tregellas, a resident of Mallacoota who spent the night on a boat ramp, said only a late shift in the wind direction sparred lives.
‘The fire just continued to grow and then the black started to descend. I couldn’t see the hand in front in my face, and it then it started to glow red and we knew the fire was coming,’ Tregellas said.
‘Ash started to fall from the air and then the embers started to come down. At that point, people started to bring their kids and families into the water. Thankfully, the wind changed and the fire moved away.’
Thousands of Australians remain cut off as fires force the closure of major roads, leaving many struggling to secure supplies.
Got a story for Metro.co.uk?
Get in touch with our news team by emailing us at webnews@metro.co.uk . For more stories like this, check our news page .
