'You think what is the world coming to? There are people who need this.'
Her processors usually supply coffee shops and airlines. Mrs Hamilton has called for a relaxation on rules so that they can now sell their milk to supermarkets instead.
'I think they can't break into the retail part of the market, the big supermarket chains, because there is a monopoly on them with these big companies and they won't allow the smaller processors to break in without being in breach of their contracts,' she said.
Elsewhere, Josette Feddes was forced to pour away 12,000 litres when processors failed to turn up to collect her milk. Her 250-strong herd produce 6,000 litres a day and she fears further waste if something isn't done soon.
She is calling for processors and the Government to work together to find a solution. Her dairy sends the bulk of its daily yield to Freshways, a processing plant in London which sells to Costa Coffee, Starbucks and airlines, but which no longer requires as much due to the lockdown.
Mrs Feddes, who has been farming at JoJo's Dairy in Wanborough, Swindon, for 12 years, said: 'It is utterly desperate. There is a need for milk – homeless people, hospitals. There are starving people in the world and this is just so frustrating.
'Milk is needed left, right and centre, there has to be a way for us to supply it. We need to find a way to use it. There are so many people without milk at the moment, it is really silly.'
In a bid not to waste any more, she and husband Jonathan have started pasteurizing as much as they can themselves and selling it in bottles at half price to the local community.
Mrs Feddes said: 'I need to look after the farm and the animals, and just do not have the time to bottle up and deliver to local businesses. We are desperate for local help to solve this supply chain issue. Cows will keep producing milk, so we can't just not milk them.'
Farmers yesterday demanded help to cope with having to throw away milk, collapsing meat prices and crops being left to rot in the fields.
Industry leaders claim food producers have been left out of the Government's coronavirus rescue efforts.
The National Farmers' Union held emergency talks with Environment Secretary George Eustice yesterday to discuss the crisis in the dairy industry.
Stark images have emerged of farmers forced to throw away gallons of fresh milk, largely because coffee shops, restaurants and the wider food service industry has been shut down.
This same issue means there has been a collapse in demand for prime cuts of beef, including high value steaks and roasting joints, and lamb, which is normally a huge seller at Easter.
Beef farmers are getting less for carcasses and the National Sheep Association said lamb was down by £50 a head.
Vegetable, fresh produce and fruit growers warn the loss of workers from Europe means there is a real risk crops will rot.
Industry trade body Dairy UK wrote an urgent letter to Mr Eustice a week ago asking for help.
His department, Defra, said it was looking at support measures. It asked the Government to buy surplus milk under a market support regime that was originally drawn up by the EU.
Surplus fresh milk can be diverted to longer life products such as butter, cheese, UHT milk and milk powder.
However, prices are lower and this system is at capacity. NFU president Minette Batters said: 'For weeks now, we have been flagging to government in our daily calls the issues within the dairy sector and working with Defra to try and find solutions. But the situation is becoming untenable.
Mr Eustice said the talks were constructive and farmers could take advantage of business loans of up to £3million being made available by the Treasury.
Share or comment on this article:
