AACo has faced investor complaints about a "drought dividend" stretching on for 11 years at the massive beef producer.
At an annual general meeting for Brisbane-based AACo on Wednesday, the company argued it was aiming to restart payouts but offered no firm timeline.
AACo chairman Donald McGauchie: “What we have to do is get the company rebuilt, generating the profits we need to generate."
It came as the company’s remuneration report seemed to squeeze through an investor protest only due to votes from its massive shareholder Tavistock, the investment vehicle of UK soccer-team owning billionaire Joe Lewis.
AACo, which runs more than 400,000 head of cattle, also talked up plans for selling high-end Wagyu cuts. “We have strengthened our unique ability to produce high-quality premium beef at scale,” AACo chief executive Hugh Killen said.
Investors raised issues from the strategy to dividends.
Ken Ryan, 78, said the company had positive aspects but pointed out the last dividend payout was in 2008.
Some of his “best mates have dropped out” of holding AACo stock because they had been “sick of waiting for dividend, and share price – disastrous”, he said.
“You talk about droughts and floods, well, the biggest drought of all I think has been the drought dividend at AACo,” he said.
Fellow investor Trevor Andrews asked: “Is there a view in the foreseeable future when a dividend will become available for shareholders?
AACo chairman Donald McGauchie countered he and other directors held “quite a few” shares themselves (he had 1.1 million in the last annual report). Mr Lewis’ Tavistock, which has representatives on the board and has quietly done co-investments with AACo, also held a significant 45 per cent holding in the beef producer.
“So we all bear the pain of getting this company to the right point. But we are turning this company around,” he said.
Mr McGauchie argued when he arrived in 2010 “there was a significant amount of debt built up” and the past strategy of paying dividends as land values increased was not sustainable.
“What we have to do is get the company rebuilt, generating the profits we need to generate, get the debt under control, get it paid down where possible – it comes under pressure in years like this – and when we got all those things working really well, then of course we'll be paying dividends,” he said.
The company posted a full-year loss of $148.4 million partly due to severe flooding in February. But AACo argued underlying operating profit – which stripped out impacts of floods – reached $23.7 million.
Its remuneration report passed with 14 per cent of votes cast against the motion.
Polls published on the ASX indicate that Tavistock had backed the remuneration report. If its 270 million votes had not been used, then the pay package would likely have faced a majority of negative votes.
Proxy advisory service CGI Glass Lewis had argued against the remuneration report, criticising disclosure as opaque and the use of a market capitalisation as the sole hurdle for long-term bonuses. Fellow advisory service ISS also held "a high degree of concern for misalignment of pay, performance and shareholder outcomes".
The beef producer also on Wednesday announced it had signed a 10-year lease for the 17,500 hectare Rewan Station in central Queensland.
AACo had been paying someone else to run the herd during certain stages of production but now the company could manage the cattle themselves.
“By bringing this asset on board, we significantly reduce cost of production numbers, and we don’t have to obviously make the capital outlay to own the property,” he said.
AACo did not currently have any plans to sell and lease back its own properties, he said.
