One beef producer who has taken the opportunity to increase stock numbers while the price is right is Channel Country cattleman, Dude Kidd, Ourdel, Windorah.
Mr Kidd (pictured left) enjoyed a much needed flood through his channels at the end of February while a second flood during April gave him a good body of herbage and clover.
He said it was an one-in-twenty-year 'plus' event that prompted him to commission his livestock agent, Peter Daniel, GDL, Dalby, to start sourcing extra stock.
"This really was a bonus opportunity as we don't buy cattle to freight back home, but in this case it was affordable to do so," Mr Kidd said.
If the season holds, Mr Kidd plans to grow out the young stock to heavy feeders, or even bullock weights if possible.
Since May, Mr Daniel has put together a good line of 1000 mixed cattle comprising of cows and calves, steers and weaner heifers for an average of $386/head.
Mr Daniel, who has been doing business with the Kidd family for many years, said the floods had coincided with rare opportunity in the cattle market.
"There is a great body of feed in the Channel Country and no feed elsewhere," he said. "I have never seen such widespread and challenging conditions as we are witnessing now."
Mr Daniel said he had been selling off entire breeding herds.
"What we are selling is someone's lifetime of breeding genetics as properties are being totally destocked," he said. "It is the first time that this current generation of beef producers are witnessing total destocking."
Landmark livestock agent Terry Ryan agreed that the season was rapidly deteriorating and said potential buyers had become sellers.
"The surface water is disappearing and as soon as the hot weather arrives, this will evaporate and make the job even tougher," Mr Ryan said.
He said agents were relying on the feedlots to operate on store cattle lines.
Mr Daniel said the longer the situation went on, the longer it would take to recover.
"When it rains, re-stocking will become a very expensive option, and if possible producers will look to convert their country to farming to get a cash flow to use towards rebuild building herds, but this will take time."
