Chr. Hansen Holding A/S - CEO, President & Member of Executive Board
Chr. Hansen Holding A/S - CFO, Executive VP & Member of Executive Board
ABG Sundal Collier Holding ASA, Research Division - Lead Analyst
Thank you for standing by, and welcome to the presentation of Chr. Hansen's results for Q3 2019/'20. (Operator Instructions) I must advise you that this conference is being recorded.
I would now like to hand the conference over to your speaker today, Chr. Hansen's CEO, Mauricio Graber. Please go ahead.
Mauricio Graber, Chr. Hansen Holding A/S - CEO, President & Member of Executive Board [2]
Thank you. Good morning, everybody, and welcome to today's conference call on Chr. Hansen's Q3 2019/'20 results. I'm here with our CFO Søren Westh Lonning and the IR team, and we hope that everyone listening in today is healthy and well during this special times. As always, we will start the call with a short presentation and then open up for questions and answers.
Before we continue, please take notice of the safe harbor statement on the next slide, Slide 2.
Thank you. Let's turn to Slide 3. Across regions and industries, trading conditions in Q3 were dominated by the global spreading of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a supplier to the food and health industries, Chr. Hansen is in the very fortunate position that we are part of what's considered an essential industry, and the demand for our products did not collapse during the lockdowns.
In Q3 -- the Q3 results are a testimony to the resilience of our business. With the measures that we have been taking to keep our employees safe and operations running, we were able to maintain business continuity throughout the lockdowns. And we also did not see any major production disruption on customer side.
With a net positive impact in Q3 from consumer pantry loading and customers securing additional safety stocks, group organic growth came in at 7% in Q3 and 5% year-to-date. Our group EBIT margin before special items was 30.8% in Q3, up 40 basis points, as scalability benefits from production and lower travel expenses due to COVID-19 restrictions were partly offset by higher freight costs and continued investments into our strategic priorities. Year-to-date, the group EBIT margin before special items stood at 28.4%, up 20 basis points compared to last year. Free cash flow before acquisitions and special items was EUR 106 million in Q3 and EUR 147 million year-to-date, which is a meaningful improvement compared to last year and the result of an improved operating cash flow but also lower CapEx spending due to phasing of projects and delays related to COVID-19.
On segment level, please turn to Slide 4. All 3 businesses showed improved momentum in Q3. Our microbial platform, Food Cultures & Enzymes and Health & Nutrition combined, delivered solid organic growth of 9% in Q3 and 6% for the year-to-date. Food Cultures & Enzymes grew 8% in Q3, which are a weak contribution from both volume and price, leading to 5% organic growth year-to-date. Health & Nutrition reported 12% organic growth in Q3 with a very strong performance in both Animal and Human Health, resulting in 6% year-to-date. Lastly, our Natural Colors division delivered 1% organic growth in Q3, and this number continues to reflect a negative impact from low raw material prices. Year-to-date sales were on par with last year. All 3 businesses, of course, saw an impact from COVID-19, but channel shift and changed consumer and customer behaviors affected the business differently, also across regions.
We tried to illustrate the different dynamics on the next page, Page 5. During the third quarter, we focused all of our efforts on keeping our employees safe and ensuring business continuity. And when I look back at the past 3 months, I have to say I am really proud of the entire Chr. Hansen organization, how they embraced the global lockdowns and this sudden change of working from home, finding new creative ways to engage with our customers digitally, advancing our R&D project in the labs at reduced capacity and with strict social distance and hygiene rules, handling the sudden variations in order volumes in production and delivering our products to customers around the world despite the travel restrictions.
If we look at the impact from consumer pantry loading and customers responding to the pandemic outbreak by placing additional holders to secure their inventories and derisk their supply chains, then the net impact for Chr. Hansen on group level in Q3 was a net positive. And as I said, we tried to illustrate the different moving parts here in this slide, but please only take the arrows as directional indications of the COVID-19 impacts.
Let me start with Food Cultures & Enzymes who generally benefited from the shift to a more at-home consumption and increased retail sales in cheese and yogurt, but we also saw demand dropping in some parts of the business. The collapse of the food service channel, for example, negatively impacted our key sales in the U.S. and the shutdowns in the meat processing industry were negative for our meat culture business. Whilst our fermented milk business saw a decline in some emerging markets as well.
Coming to Health & Nutrition. Human Health also benefited from customer increasing orders, short term, to build up additional safety stocks and cater to the extraordinary demand from end consumers.
Our Animal and Plant Health business on the other side did not see a material impact from COVID-19 yet. But -- though our ability to advance projects with customers was limited because of travel restrictions and a decline in commodity prices, putting farmers under more pressure.
Lastly, for Natural Colors, COVID-19 was a net negative in Q3, but with regional variations. In markets where we have a large exposure to products that benefited from increased at-home consumptions, like packaged foods or confectionery, we saw a step-up in sales. Warehousing markets where we have large exposure to products that are mainly sold during summer travel season for out-of-home consumption or into food service, demand dropped. Overall, it's clear that our Q3 results do reflect a positive contribution from customers, building additional safety inventories to ensure business continuity. However, after a spike in March and at the beginning of April, we have already seen order patterns normalized during the second half of our Q3.
If we look at our commercial pipeline, and we have mentioned this already in our last call, this is where we are most cautious about the potential negative impact over the next 12 to 18 months and in the medium term. As you know, an important step of our Food Cultures & Enzyme sales process is running trials together with customers at their premises to demonstrate the efficacy of our products. Because of the travel restrictions, though we were not able to do that to the same extent that normally, and we may see slower progress of our commercialization pipeline. We are also likely to see longer registration times for new products for the late clinical studies within Health & Nutrition.
And lastly, as we are facing a global recession, there is a likelihood of consumers down-trading and customers focusing more on cost, especially in emerging markets, and this could impact all 3 businesses. That said, there are also opportunities coming out of COVID-19 for Chr. Hansen. The increased demand for immunity enhancing products, for example, resulted in a lot of good dialogue with customers for new probiotic solutions that we are still to see in the numbers and in the market. But overall, I would say that we are facing a more challenging period ahead.
If we look a bit more into the regional numbers, please turn to Slide 6. Then group organic growth in the third quarter was mostly driven by EMEA, APAC and Latin America. In Europe, Middle East and Africa, organic growth was 6% in Q3, leading to 1% year-to-date. Food Cultures & Enzymes delivered solid growth, especially driven by Europe, whilst Middle East and Africa were more challenged. Health & Nutrition reported a strong quarter on the back of COVID-19, whilst Natural Colors declined because of lower demand in food services and the tourism sector. Furthermore, the adverse economic climate in the Middle East and low raw material prices impacted the division negatively.
Whilst in EMEA, we saw positive trend compared to the first half of the year, North America delivered a softer quarter with 1% organic growth in Q3 and 5% year-to-date. Food Cultures & Enzymes and Natural Colors were adversely impacted by the disruptions in food service. And Health & Nutrition delivered good growth, but grew at a slower pace than during the first half of the year. This is explained by the fact that the improved momentum in the U.S. supplements market was partly offset by higher comparables in Human Health, and Animal Health posted less growth explained by a normal seasonality in silage and more normal sales momentum in cattle after 2 record quarters.
Latin America, the region which was last hit by the pandemic, reported 20% organic growth in Q3 and 15% year-to-date. The contribution from euro pricing in the quarter was approximately half. Food Cultures & Enzymes and Natural Colors grew strongly, driven by recent launches and new customer wins, while Health & Nutrition posted good growth, driven by Animal and Human Health that was partly offset by decline sales in Plant Health.
As you remember from our last call, Plant Health is facing a more challenging time at the moment with lower-than-expected momentum in soy. But together with our partner, we have taken steps to address this, and we hope to be back in growth territory next year.
Lastly, looking at Asia Pacific, we posted strong growth in Q3 of 13%, which led to 5% organic growth year-to-date. Here, the COVID-19 drivers were actually positive for both Health & Nutrition and Natural Colors. Human Health experienced strong demand for both supplements and infant formula, while Natural Colors business benefited from increased at-home consumption, for example, in Southeast Asia. Food Cultures & Enzymes revenues were at par with last year as growing fermented milk continued to be offset by decline in probiotics in China. In China, where we saw negative impact from COVID-19 already last quarters, yogurt production levels continued to be below normal levels, but we saw decent demand in Q3 also from inventory buildup. In probiotics, despite another quarter of declined sales, we have actually seen the first launches with immunity claims in South Korea and expect more to come out of our pipeline over the next quarters.
After all these comments related to COVID-19, I am excited to also talk about the strategic progress we have made during the quarter with regards to further expanding our microbial platform. So let's turn to next slide, Slide 7, please. With HSO Health Care and UAS Labs, we have announced 2 acquisitions within Human Health in Q3 and early Q4 that will strengthen our probiotics offering and expand our microbial platform. With HSO Health Care, we are building on our position in the fast-growing women health market, which is estimated to be the third largest probiotic category after gout and immunity health. HSO Health Care is an Austrian biotechnology company that was founded in 2007 and has strong offering for women health with its unique Astarte brand with 4 strains of probiotic blend. The company has grown double digit over the past few years and expected to generate about EUR 50 million in revenue in the calendar year 2000 (sic) [2020.] The acquisition rationale is very much based on leveraging Chr. Hansen's global commercial capabilities to expand HSO reach beyond U.S. and Europe, particularly into Asia. Furthermore, we will continue to advance our innovation pipeline in this attractive category by bringing Chr. Hansen's and HSO's strengths together and developing new concept for all life stages from fertility to menopause. The acquisition closed with the announcement, and we are well on track with the integration, which is expected to take about 24 months.
Our second acquisition, UAS Labs, which is still subject to regulatory approval, will further strengthen our position in dietary supplements. UAS Labs is a U.S.-based probiotic player with expected revenue of around EUR 75 million in calendar year 2000 (sic) 2020. Over the past years, UAS has very successfully built a business in the fast-growing multi-strain, high-potency space, where Chr. Hansen has historically not invested. With the acquisition, we will not only get access to UAS Labs' documented strains but also acquire 2 GMP production sites with downstream capabilities, which will give us more flexibility in production and allow us to serve even a broader customer base in the future. Similar to HSO Health Care, we see significant potential for production, innovation and commercial synergies, and we are very excited to have the team of more than 230 employees join the Chr. Hansen family.
I think it is useful in this context to also reflect that our capital allocation framework and put those 2 acquisitions into context. Please turn to next slide, Slide 8. Both acquisitions are fully in line with our framework and our strategy of pursuing bolt-on acquisitions that strengthen our microbial platform, particularly within the fast-growing Health & Nutrition space. If we look at our priorities for capital allocation, then organic growth will continue to be our #1 priority, followed by bolt-on acquisitions, then ordinary dividends and finally, distribution of excess cash to shareholders. We will continue to assess opportunities for inorganic growth in the future with the intent of pursuing similar acquisitions that extend our technology platform or strengthen our market presence. But let me reassure you that we will also continue to operate with the same level of financial discipline and focus on value creation as we have done in the past.
And with this, I would like to hand over to Søren to give you a bit more color into the Q3 numbers.
Søren Westh Lonning, Chr. Hansen Holding A/S - CFO, Executive VP & Member of Executive Board [3]
Thank you, Mauricio. And please move to Slide 9 for the segment review. Food Cultures & Enzymes grew 8% organically in Q3 with equal contributions from volume and price, leading to 5% organic growth year-to-date, which is well in line with our guidance. Despite the positive tailwind from increased yogurt and cheese retail sales, dairy end markets continue to track at a low level with fermented milk on par with last year and cheese estimated to grow 1% year-to-date. In fermented milk, we saw the disruption in the Chinese yogurt production from March to May and more difficult trading condition in some emergents markets like Middle East and India. On the cheese side, the disruptions came mainly from the U.S., but food service is a key channel and dairy farmers despite government support had to throw away milk because of oversupply and lower prices.
If we look at the performance by product segment. Enzymes grew strongly in the third quarter with good uptake of our NOLA Fit and CHY-MAX Supreme enzymes. Fermented milk also grew strongly, whilst cheese and meat cultures delivered solid growth and probiotics declined slightly, although with an improving trend. Bioprotection grew around 10%.
Looking at profitability. The EBIT margin for Food Cultures & Enzymes decreased 70 basis points to 34.4% in Q3, as increased freight cost because of COVID-19 and a small negative impact from currencies offset the benefits from lower travel activity and production efficiencies.
Please move to the next slide, Slide 10. In Health & Nutrition, Human Health and Animal Health both delivered strong growth, whilst Plant Health declined, leading to 12% for the quarter and 6% year-to-date. Please remember that year-to-date organic growth remained impacted by adverse order timing in Q1. The strong performance in Human Health was driven by both dietary supplements and infant formula that benefited from increased interest in health and immunity enhancing products, such as probiotics. In Animal Health, we also saw a strong momentum in both cattle and poultry and swine. Lastly, Plant Health did decline because of the weakness in soy mentioned earlier, but we expect this business area to be able -- to be back in growth territory as of next quarter. That said, it is also true that we are looking ahead into next year, and there is risk that the global recession and lower oil prices may impact our ability to drive penetration in sugarcane as farmers may decide to postpone replanting.
Looking at profitability for the segment. The EBIT margin was 34.7% in Q3, up 3.9 percentage point, driven by cost-management initiatives and savings from COVID-19-related travel restrictions as well as scalability from the strong top line.
Moving on to Natural Colors on the next slide, Slide 11. The division reported 1% organic growth in Q3 and flat sales year-to-date, as our Natural Colors business continued to be challenged by low raw material prices for carmine and annatto and also saw a net negative impact from COVID-19, as described by Mauricio earlier.
Regionally, the economic climate in Middle East remained very challenging. That said, excluding the weakness in Middle East and the raw material headwinds, Natural Colors would have grown by 5% year-to-date. Across geographies, the key growth driver for our Natural Colors business remain our premium range of coloring foods, which reported very strong growth. Looking at profitability, the division's EBIT margin stood at 14.3% in Q3. Benefits from low raw material prices and less travel activities were offset by increased freight cost and adverse currencies.
Let's now look at the group financials on the next slide, Slide 12. Year-to-date, group organic growth of 5% was mostly driven by volume. Currencies had a negative impact leading to 3% euro growth year-to-date. If we look at profitability drivers, the gross margin decreased to 55.0%, as scalability benefits in Food Cultures & Enzymes and low raw material prices in Natural Colors were more than offset by increased freight cost as a result of COVID-19.
Operating expenses decreased by 50 basis points year-to-date despite continued investment into strategic priorities, driven by cost-management initiatives and lower travel expenses due to COVID-19. Overall, this led to an EBIT margin before special items of 28.4% for the year, up 20 basis points. Special items of EUR 5 million in total were related to our recent acquisitions and the BacThera JV.
Turning to the cash flow. Free cash flow before acquisitions and special items increased substantially to EUR 147 million year-to-date. The improvement was driven by the positive cash flow from operating activities, which was due to a favorable change in the net working capital, IFRS 16 adjustments, lower taxes and higher operating profit. The change in net working capital is mainly related to timing and does not reflect any changes with regards to how we run our business. Cash flow used for operational investment activities was 9.1% of revenue compared to 11.3% last year because of phasing of projects and delays related to COVID-19. For the full year, we now expect CapEx to end around the prior year level of EUR 139 million.
With regards to our balance sheet, Chr. Hansen remains in a strong position with a leverage ratio of around 2.1x EBITDA despite the recent acquisition.
With this, I would now like to move on to the guidance on the next slide, Slide 13. Based on the business performance of the first 9 months of our financial year 2019/'20, we maintain our guidance for organic growth and EBIT margin before special items and upgrade our free cash flow guidance, although I have to say, subject to high uncertainty than normal with regards to end market demand because of the COVID-19 pandemic and the global recession that we are entering.
For 2019/'20, expectation to organic growth is maintained at 4% to 6%. The microbial platform, which is the combination of Food Cultures & Enzymes and Health & Nutrition, is expected to grow mid-single digit. Food Culture & Enzymes is expected to grow significantly above the relatively low end market growth and with a positive impact from euro pricing. Organic growth in Health & Nutrition will primarily be driven by Animal Health as well as Human Health. Natural Colors is still expected to deliver flat-to-slight organic growth due to the continued low raw material prices and COVID-19. The EBIT margin before special items is still expected to be around 29.5%, increased utilization of production capacity and lower travel activities will have a positive impact on the margin, which is expected to be offset by investments in the lighthouse projects as well as higher freight cost due to COVID-19. Acquisitions will have a smaller negative impact on group EBIT margins before special items. Free cash flow before acquisitions and special items is now expected to be around EUR 200 million and to be above EUR 200 million as COVID-19 has delayed CapEx projects, and as a result, cash flow used for operational investment activities is now expected to be lower.
And with this, I would now like to hand back to Mauricio to wrap up.
Mauricio Graber, Chr. Hansen Holding A/S - CEO, President & Member of Executive Board [4]
Thank you, Søren. I am sure you have seen in the company announcement that we have also announced a new date for our Capital Markets Day, where we will present the results of our strategy review process. As we have said in the past, we continue to believe strongly in the opportunities that our microbial platform and fermentation technology offer, and you should not expect any major changes. However, as part of our portfolio review, the Board of Directors, together with the Executive Board, have decided to explore options for the future of our Natural Colors division including a potential sale of the business as it does not share the same microbial platform with the rest of the business. At this point in time, we can unfortunately not provide any further information on this, which I am sure you will understand. That said, we hope to be able to provide an update at the Capital Markets Day in August.
To wrap up, Chr. Hansen maneuvered very well through the first phase of this global pandemic crisis. And whilst at the moment, countries around the world are slowly opening up again, trying to return to some kind of new normality, it is also clear that the pandemic is not over yet and that we will have to deal with it and its consequences for some time ahead. We delivered a solid Q3 result with a net positive effect from customer safety inventory buildup that we expect to see come down further over the course of the next quarters as global supply chains normalize.
We maintain our guidance for organic growth and EBIT margin for the year, and we upgrade our cash flow guidance, assuming no major disruptions in our supply chain from COVID-19, but it's also clear that we are heading into a global recession, we will face more challenging trading conditions if consumers are changing spending patterns and customers increasingly come under pressure to save costs. At the same time, we will focus our efforts on capitalizing on the increased awareness and interest in health and well-being and probiotics and our 2 acquisitions with Human Health -- within Human Health will help us on this journey.
Lastly, we look very much forward to welcoming you at our Virtual Capital Markets Day on August 24 and 25, and I recommend that you check our Investor Relations website to sign up in advance.
With this, I would like now to open up the call for questions and answers. Thank you.
