Her mother, who recently moved in with her family after her father sustained a brain injury, has been staffing the phones and coordinating the deliveries, hundreds of them a week.
“I feel grateful to still have a business that can function at this time,” Jagoz says. “I’m grateful to have the support of the community and to have the infrastructure to make a pivot that works right away.”
Other farmers, though, aren’t poised to adapt so easily. Clay Oliver, whose farm in Pitts, Ga., produces artisanal cold-pressed oils from pecans, sunflowers and pumpkins, has seen his business plummet. About a third of his revenue comes from restaurants — high-end chefs all over the South have swooned over his award-winning oil pressed from delicate fresh green peanuts — but they’re all closed. Small retail shops, many catering to tourists who are now staying home, make up about another third. He’s left with Internet sales, which he says fluctuate.
He cut production last week and gave his few employees the week off. “My strategy is just to hold on as long as we can,” says Oliver, who operates from the family farm he and his brother inherited. “Fortunately, we are pretty small and we don’t have a ton of debt. I don’t have to get a note paid.” Still, he worries.
He canceled a delivery when he realized it was to Albany, Ga., a town that has turned into a hotspot for the virus. Three customers were schools that are now shuttered. He hasn’t yet had a problem getting supplies, but he fears there could be hiccups. Still, he feels more ready than most. “Coming from a farm and growing up like we did, you’d hear people say, ‘Hard times are coming again,’ ” he says. “You try to prepare for that.”
And hard times might be coming. The potential $688.7 million decline in lost sales that the National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition warned about comes from the closure of restaurants, schools and other sales outlets — but mostly from the closure or shrinkage of farmers markets around the country, which could account for $600 million in lost revenue, according to the report.
Ben Feldman, executive director of the Farmers Market Coalition, says there is ambiguity in some parts of the country about whether farmers markets are “essential” businesses that can remain open as stay-at-home orders take effect. A dozen states, including Maryland, have issued clarification that they are, he notes, but elsewhere, cities are shutting them down. “The inconsistency we’re seeing is creating a real problem,” says Feldman, whose organization is seeking clarity from federal officials.
Even where markets remain open, they might be less lucrative. Some markets may have space for fewer vendors, he notes, as they implement social distancing rules. And farmers and markets alike need more staff to control the flow of customers, which comes with increased costs.
Accommodating social distancing has been a shift for farmers who might be used to letting customers rifle through bins of tomatoes or offering hugs and handshakes to regulars. In Vermont, Varley initially reacted by limiting the number of customers in the farm store to one family at a time. Then she morphed the operation into an order-ahead, drive-through service, setting up tables along the driveway where people pull up and she and her husband load packages into their back seats.
Justin Bridle, left, and Joe Brillon pack up produce boxes at Moon Valley Farm. (Photo by Deb Lindsey for The Washington Post)
“It felt tricky to me because I love being with the community as much as I can,” says Varley, fresh off a Zoom conference with her bookkeeper to figure out how to sync up the new ordering and payment system. “But it became clear that the priority had to be minimizing touching and human interaction.”
Another challenge for farmers has to do with planting. Farmers who have specialized in ingredients for chefs are thinking about what home cooks might want instead.
Jagoz says her customers are just as adventurous in the kitchen as the pros. But the Gurleys are eyeing a large patch of peppers they planted specially for a chef who planned to use them in a hot sauce. Maybe home cooks will want them, Beckie figures. It might be too late for the fava beans that are already in the ground — Gurley says they’re more popular with chefs than home cooks. “We’ll be putting in more sugar snaps and shelling peas for them,” she says.
Despite the turmoil and the potential peril, many small farmers say the coronavirus pandemic has brought an unlikely gift, as consumers think more about where their food is coming from and what might happen if the produce and meats they are so used to finding, in abundance, on the shelves of grocery stores suddenly weren’t there.
[ Grocery shopping during the coronavirus: Wash your hands, keep your distance and limit trips ]
Dena Leibman, director of Future Harvest, a group that supports farmers in the Chesapeake region, says she’s been overwhelmed by the interest in local food — and not just from the typical CSA crowd. “Now it’s not just a certain type of person who is seeking out and getting local produce,” she says.
Her organization worked with the Maryland Farmers Market Association to develop a “Find a Farmer” map of farms, markets, butcher shops and wineries to help people source their food locally. Since it went live March 21, the groups say, it has been viewed more than 25,000 times.
“We have the opportunity to share the message that knowing your farmer and knowing your food is better,” says Jagoz, who has adopted the mantra on social media and with fellow farmers that “local is the new normal.” “And that’s not just in the face of this virus, but in the face of climate change or economic uncertainty.”
For now, farmers are like everyone else muddling through the economic terrain, though they may be more used to uncertainty than many other business owners, with early frosts, failed crops and damaging storms to prepare them.
Meredith Molli, a chef and farmer who owns the Goose and Gander Farm in Carnation, Wash., is waiting to see what happens next. Her own restaurant in Seattle is closed, and her CSA doesn’t start until the summer. All she can do, for now, is plant.
“I’m having a lot of anxiety, like everyone else,” she says. “I’m just focused on growing as much food as I can. That makes me feel as positive as I can.”
In Georgia, Oliver just filed an application for a loan under the Small Business Administration’s new disaster relief program. He’s heard some of the loans might be forgiven. But his thoughts about the future are mostly in the land. He’s preparing to plant this year’s sunflower crop, which will be harvested this summer. Based on demand from last year, he had been planning to expand. What about now? He figures he’ll go ahead and plant more anyway, he says: “We can’t worry about this thing preventing everything.”
