Falling soya meal prices provide some respite for UK livestock producers: Grain Market Daily
US maize futures closed lower again yesterday. Sustained pressure from expectations for reduced ethanol demand in the short/mid term future and falling crude oil prices are continuing to impact the market. The nearby contract (May-20) closed at $121.75/t, down $6.60/t from last Tuesday.
Palm oil prices have also seen declines, following muted demand expectations for the upcoming Ramadan and Eid religious festivals. Catering and hotel services have seen closures in keeping with state lockdowns. Malaysian palm oil exports for March were down 27% from last year, the lowest volume since 2016. Vegetable oil markets are likely to see pressure from falling palm oil prices.
During March, soya meal markets recorded elevated levels of support in the face of coronavirus. Global demand for feed increased, while global availability fell. Countries that had first entered lock-downs experienced large-scale logistical disruptions. Recently, with global soya supply at a high, soya meal prices have since retraced back to pre-March levels. This has provided some respite for the UK livestock industry, which makes use of imports for protein feed sources.
Panic buying of food supplies at the end of March resulted in many countries increasing imports of animal feed supplies, particularly soyabeans and soya meal to supplement feedstocks. Reports of logistical delays at Argentinian ports increased global supply concerns and soya meal prices to a point. Brazilian exports of soyabeans reached record levels for March at 13.5Mt, benefiting from the reduced value of its currency.
Since then, news is more bearish for the short/mid term. This has contributed to the recent declines in the soya meal price. At the continued sluggish US soya export pace, it hitting its global and Chinese ‘Phase-one deal’ targets seem unlikely. Combining this with a likely increase to US soyabean planted area, at the expense of maize, US stocks of soyabeans could hit near-record levels come harvest in September. My colleague Anthony recently explored the pressures surrounding maize and what this could mean for US soyabean area In addition, despite a moisture deficit in Brazil, the country is still on course for a record soyabean harvest.
However, there remains long-term support for soya meal. With China beginning to open up again onto the world stage, the country is resuming the recovery of its pork production. Chinese officials expect a significant recovery to its pig herd in 2020, although this could well be hampered by coronavirus and the African Swine Fever outbreak that began in 2018.
From a UK view, this sentiment has helped drive the direction of delivered (48% Pro) soya meal prices. On 27 March, prices were quoted at £375.00/t for May delivery into Liverpool. As of 17 April, prices had declined £48/t to be quoted at £327.00/t for May delivery into Liverpool.
You can subscribe to receive Grain Market Daily straight to your inbox. Simply fill in your contact details on our online form and select the information you wish to receive.
The release of the latest AHDB usage data has shown animal feed production down across all sectors in May.
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES) estimates that Australia’s wheat production for 2020/21 will reach 26.6Mt, up 11.5Mt on the year.
UK feed barley prices could face further pressure in 2020/21 after data shows Canadian farmers have planted the most acres to barley since 2009.
Although yields are uncertain, there will be another significant barley crop this year. Prices may see pressure later in harvest from the spring crop, and then may gain slightly as farmer selling slows.
Top global grain supplier Russia are already proposing the imposition an export quota onto the second half (Jan -Jun) of the 2020/21 marketing year, although the volume has not been announced it has potential ramifications for global and UK prices.
UK wheat could receive either a boost or come under additional pressure in the next few weeks from what happens to US maize crops as they’re now at a critical growth stage.
Have you factored these risks into your marketing plan, cash flow and business plan for the next 2 seasons?
Now that the latest WASDE report figures are known, it is important to examine the other factors that could provide sentiment for wheat markets between now and harvest.
In response to the continued dry weather through May, the EU’s Crop Monitoring (MARS) service has further downgraded its forecasts for UK crop yields, including spring barley.
Wheat prices fall as USDA increases stocks: Grain Market Daily
US wheat markets fell to a 3-week low at close yesterday and imposed pressure on global and UK wheat markets to follow. Global wheat season-end stocks and US wheat production estimates were raised in the USDA’s world supply and demand estimates (WASDE) released yesterday.
New crop delivered milling wheat premiums (North West) have recently extended to their widest point over new crop feed futures, in June, since 2011/12.
The latest crop development report released last month does not pose much confidence for UK rapeseed in 2020/21.
UK feed wheat futures prices have been variable over recent weeks, at least in part due to uncertainty over the impact of unfavourable weather on crops in Europe and the Black Sea region.
Barley usage for the brewing, malting and distilling sector in April was just 114.7kt. This is the lowest figure in over a decade.
As we move towards harvest 2020, the value of imported grains and oilseeds will play a key role in setting the price of domestic supplies, the value of imported maize will prove pivotal to setting values in feed markets.
An update to US planting figures: Grain market daily
Planting figures for US maize and soyabean crops were slightly below market pre-release estimates, according to Monday’s US crop progress report. Progress has slowed from the rapid pace seen at the start of the season, but remains above the five-year average (2015-19).
Higher UK wheat supplies due to a large production year and relatively stable demand, combined with our export campaign slowing considerably post October have resulted in a large increase in closing stocks.
During our barley week last week, we highlighted the increase in trade tensions between China and Australia, with the former potentially imposing a $74/t tariff on imports of Australian barley. This offers a high degree of price risk for domestic barley, particularly given the significant export volumes expected from the UK next year.
News of countries beginning to ease lockdown measures has enabled vegetable oil prices to show some signs of recovery. UK rapeseed prices have benefitted from both this rise in Paris futures and a weakening GBP/EUR exchange rate.
In the latest ADAS Crop Condition report, 26% of winter wheat is rated ‘very poor’ or ‘poor’, this is a considerably large increase from last year when it was 5%.
