The Federal Agriculture Minister fears stock losses from the recent Australian bushfires will exceed 100,000, as farmers around the country begin to assess the fires' impacts to their properties and livestock.
WARNING: This article contains content which some readers may find distressing.
On the last day of 2019, a fire burnt towards Belinda Attree's property in the Nariel Valley, near Corryong in Victoria's north.
Like many other farmers, her family made the decision to open the farm gates to give their cattle the best chance of escaping the blaze, but many did not survive.
"The cattle were just dead in the paddock and my husband was just trying to put them all in one place to dispose of them.
"Having to pick them up on the forks of the tractor — he said they just fall apart.
In the Nariel Valley, near Corryong, Belinda Attree says they've had to shoot a number of the cattle injured in the bushfires.
The race to treat those injured in the fires has started and it is understood many more livestock will need to be euthanised.
"We had cows with calves at foot," Ms Attree said.
"Their teats are all burnt and they can't feed their calves.
"Walking these cows down to the yard — there were calves just dropping, falling down and not able to walk, and we were having to go back and shoot them."
The Federal Government has made 100 veterinarians available to assist in assessing the livestock left standing, in similar situations across the country.
The Federal Agriculture Minister, Bridget McKenzie, said they were working with State Governments to understand the level of catastrophe.
"Last week I was out on the ground looking at the Corryong fire impact, and there were thousands of head dead there," she said.
"In the South Australian fires — the Adelaide Hills — there would have been a little over 3,000 head deceased as a result of the fires directly, but in the subsequent weeks we've seen stock really dying because of heat stress and smoke inhalation.
Tens of thousands of cattle have died in the bushfires.
Ms McKenzie said with active fires still burning, delivering fodder and disposing of the deceased animals had been prioritised.
"When we are talking to state farming organisations, they are saying first and foremost we need to get fodder into these herds, and they also need clear water," she said.
Ms McKenzie said the government was looking to have dead livestock buried within a week.
"We know the disposal of livestock deceased from the fires is of paramount urgency," she said.
A map put together by agriculture market analyst company Mecardo found about 8.6 million head of sheep and 2.3 million cattle live in areas impacted by the bushfires across Victoria and New South Wales, making up about 12 per cent of the sheep flock and nine per cent of the national cattle herd.
Agriculture market analysts believe it could take months before the impact of the bushfires on stock is fully understood.
Senior market analyst Matt Dalgleish said because of the size of the area impacted, it could be months before the exact figures on stock losses were known.
"It's a far bigger area than what was impacted by the Queensland floods, and that took about 3 months before we knew about the amount of cattle impacted," he said.
If you or anyone you know needs help:
