Auctioneer Simon Payne and MyLiveStock Regional Manager Stephen Sutton in action in front of the camera as well as bidders at a sales in Stratford last week.
The Covid-19 crisis is accelerating moves towards holding livestock sales online.
Nearly 2000 farmers have signed up to buy and sell animals through virtual saleyard, Bidr, a subsidiary of PGG Wrightson, during the lockdown, PGG Wrightson general manager of livestock Peter Moore said.
"We've had a massive increase since we went into level 4, pre-Covid there were 950 people signed up and now there are nearly 2800 at the end of April."
The company opened access to the platform to agents from any company under a special agreement at the start of the lockdown, when saleyards around the country were closed.
Under Bidr, vendors list their animals for sale and a stock agent assesses the animals, takes photographs and video, and assigns them a sale date and time, which is held just as with a physical sale, but buyers bid online.
The animals don't leave the farm until after they are sold, which reduces stress on the stock and saves on cartage, Moore said.
"It is new technology, quite a change in how people buy and sell stock, people have to get used to not being able to see and physically touch the animals."
He said it was too soon to predict how popular online selling would remain after the lockdown ended.
"My feeling is Covid will change the way a lot of people think about doing business, whether selling livestock or buying online," he said.
Last week, after the country moved to level 3, NZ Farmers Livestock held its first live-streamed sales in real time at saleyards in Frankton and Stratford.
Cameras filmed the auctioneers and 156 cattle sold at Thursday's sale in Stratford, which buyers could attend in person or bid online.
While there were online bids, all cattle were sold to in-person bidders.
There were more eyes on the cattle than just those at a sale held under Covid Level 3 restrictions in Stratford on Thursday.
"Prices were good, the market was strong. Overall it was a good day," NZ Farmers Livestock, general manager Bill Sweeney said on the day.
Only 20 bidders attended the sale in person and strict Covid-19 safety restrictions, including social distancing, were in place, with no spectators permitted inside to watch, he said.
Screens followed the sales proceedings.
The suspension of saleyard trading during the Covid-19 lockdown has pushed people to adapt to using technology, livestock manager Donald Baines of Carrfields Livestock, said.
"One of the big problems with online sales has been the internet connectivity into rural areas, but it's getting to the point it's becoming more viable," he said.
The company, which operates mobile livestock sales throughout New Zealand, is one of the companies using Bidr.
After Covid-19 those who traditionally used saleyards would return but the online option would open the market up wider, he said.
"It will come down to personal preference," he said. "I think in time it's fairly logical that livestock will increasingly be sold online."
