Parched hills near Gladstone. Dry conditions and overloaded meat works are putting Wairarapa farmers under pressure.
A perfect storm is developing for Wairarapa farmers, who are starting to run out of water for their stock but also unable to get them killed.
Although the region is not officially in drought, creeks and bores are drying up, worsened by low rainfall last year.
Traditionally farmers send their stock to the meat works in such circumstances, but processors are overloaded with requests and reportedly cutting back on processing due of a drop in demand from coronavirus-hit China.
As water restrictions come on, some farmers have even been rejected by water cartage companies. One supplier, who asked to remain anonymous, said limits on their water source meant they could now only sell drinking water, not for stock.
Wairarapa stock agent John Griffith Jnr said farmers had had a strong run in the last couple of years, and many stock were in prime condition, but circumstances were now working against them.
"There's a whole convergence of things," he said.
Masterton farmer Tony Gibson says many of the region's farmers are desperate for water.
"We've had a lot of wind, things have gotten very, very dry and water has become an issue. Dams are starting to get low and there's a delay to get stock into the works, anywhere between four to six weeks now.
"And of course, this coronavirus has come along which on our farming calendar could not have hit us at a worse time, when kills are at capacity.
"So yes, it's all going against them. Feed disappearing, can't get rid of stock, stock is starting to lose a bit of weight because of water and quality of feed. It's a perfect storm."
Glen Meredith at Orui Station near Riversdale said he was in a reasonable situation, thanks to his dams and the fact that he had destocked early.
Meredith said the Wairarapa had only received 750 millimetres of rain last year compared to the usual 1000mm, so farmers had been on their guard.
"This is just a normal season, really. Some people might find it a bit harder but it's usually the younger ones who haven't had a beating yet," he said.
Masterton farmer Tony Gibson agreed most experienced farmers had a plan, but the virus had been a wild card and "water is getting really critical".
The Waingawa River, south of Masterton. A total watering ban in Masterton has been relaxed, but Carterton and south Wairarapa's remain, potentially for the rest of the summer.
He was lucky because he was part of a water scheme and had moved much of his stock to another property.
Some farmers had the luxury of a dam, although that had its problems too because as the water table fell, the mud increased and animals could get stuck.
Others would be sending stock outside the region, at great cost. "Stock will be going down to the South Island, I'm picking."
"I've got 30 head of cattle ready to be killed but there's no room at the works, and I've got 300 lambs to be killed in two weeks, but I'm definitely not holding my breath."
One of the region's major meat processors, Alliance, confirmed its plants at Levin and Dannevirke were working to maximum capacity, and that stock could be moved to the South Island if things got worse.
But general manager of livestock, Danny Hailes, denied that the China situation had anything to do with Alliance's backlog.
"I understand some others may have limited capacity for whatever reasons, including storage capacity, but that hasn't impacted us."
Stock agent Ray Spencer agreed the biggest factor in the processing delays was the weather, because farmers would otherwise be able to carry their animals through.
As it was, they were managing the best way they could, including selling to the livestock yards.
However, Rihi Brown, a PGG stock agent in Martinborough, said certain meats were definitely not getting much processing time.
But there were other markets for lamb.
And this was a problem for the whole country, he said. "I've had guys on the books since December ... you can imagine the backlog of ewes within New Zealand to be killed."
While China was not responsible for Alliance's backlog, Hailes agreed it had been a big factor in falling sheepmeat and beef prices, which have dropped 20 to 25 per cent in a matter of weeks.
Prices were actually close to the same level as last year, but were significantly lower from where they were after an outbreak of African swine fever, which decimated global pork supplies.
"There was a major pricing correction just before Christmas and what's happened is the [Chinese] government's stepped in because protein prices were getting too high," Hailes said.
Now with the coronavirus on top, it remained to be seen just how fast Chinese demand would recover.
"There is still demand for protein ... it will be a question of how far prices will move down, and where they will settle down, but we expect them to come back."
Orui station, near Riversdale, where Glen Meredith says he was lucky to destock early.
Other areas of New Zealand affected by increasingly dry conditions include Northland, Hawkes Bay and Nelson.
In Hawkes Bay, irrigation bans have been put in place in parts of the Ngaruroro, Waipawa and Tukituki Rivers, affecting more than 200 consent holders.
Federated Farmers Wairarapa president William Beetham said dry conditions were not just affecting the Wairarapa but also stretched across to the Hawkes Bay, Manawatu and towards the Rangitikei.
But farmers could find support and options for their stock by reaching out.
"The companies are being incredibly responsible and working through their backlog as well as they possibly can, plus opening up other opportunities to ensure the coronavirus is well managed.
"A lot of farmers who are probably sitting in a difficult situation might not actually be communicating clearly with their processor and often that can happen - when people get into a difficult situation, you're not thinking about your options.
"So work with those key people in your business, understand where their position is, talk about your position, and create a plan about how you're going to deal with the dry situation."
Wairarapa hills are bone dry at the moment.
