FDA Says Cattle Likely Source of E. Coli That Contaminated Romaine in 2019
Dangerous E. coli bacteria  that caused three foodborne illness outbreaks in late 2019 most likely came  from cattle that grazed near fields of romaine lettuce or leafy greens,  according to a recent U.S. Food and Drug Administration report .  FDA’s findings make clear that growers, ranchers, and local, state, and federal  agencies must work together to prevent contamination of leafy greens by pathogens  commonly present in animal fecal matter. This food safety problem cannot be  solved by a single industry or regulatory authority.
Public health officials linked the three  outbreaks—each caused by a different strain of E. coli O157:H7—to romaine  lettuce or salad mixes, and traced these products to several fields in  California’s Salinas Valley. According to FDA’s report released in May, investigators  found the E. coli strain from the largest of the outbreaks in a sample  of fecal and soil matter taken from a cattle grate within 2 miles of multiple  fields where romaine had been grown. Other harmful strains unrelated to the  2019 outbreaks turned up in samples taken from an area between fields and  grazing land and from on-farm water drainage basins.
This is not the first time that  cattle have been implicated as a likely source of produce contamination. A  feedlot with tens of thousands of animals adjacent to an irrigation canal used  by farms in Yuma, Arizona, was the  possible source of E. coli in a 2018 outbreak also linked to romaine.  FDA’s investigation in the Salinas Valley highlights that much smaller herds also  can pose contamination risks for nearby produce operations.
The FDA report makes clear that  allowing cattle to graze near fields that grow romaine lettuce or other leafy  greens creates an unacceptable risk to the health of consumers, who often eat these  foods raw. The question is how best to reduce this danger.
The report recommends that growers “redouble”  prevention efforts, “assess and mitigate risks associated with adjacent and  nearby land uses,” and create buffer zones between fields and grazing  lands as well as physical barriers to divert water runoff away from crops. An  FDA action  plan detailed agency efforts to reduce outbreaks  linked to leafy greens, including plans to complete its report on the Salinas investigation  and release revised  standards for the quality of water used in produce operations.
These  steps are necessary but not sufficient to effectively address this situation. Although  the agency oversees produce safety, it does not regulate livestock operations;  in fact, no federal agency does.
The solution to a complex problem like this one  requires a multidimensional approach. For example, a wide range of stakeholders  could be brought together to develop a coordinated plan to address risks  created when produce and animal agriculture businesses are located near one another. Produce  farmers and cattle ranchers should be at the table, along with federal, state,  and local authorities.
State and local authorities have jurisdiction over  land use, whether for cattle grazing or other activities. That’s why  agencies at those levels need to consider adjacent land use when allowing  cattle to graze on a particular property and put in place appropriate  requirements and restrictions.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture does not have  jurisdiction on the farms, ranches, and feedlots where cattle are raised; its  oversight of meat and poultry safety begins when the animals are slaughtered  and processed into products such as steaks and ground beef. However, the department  does run programs that provide financial assistance to growers and ranchers that,  for example, take steps to address natural resource and environmental  concerns.
USDA should evaluate whether these programs could help  livestock operations to control fecal contamination from cattle more  effectively. If existing programs do not allow for such incentives, then the  department should consider establishing ones that do.
FDA should lead an effort to find  comprehensive solutions to the public health problems created when cattle and  produce farms operate in proximity. Without such solutions, Americans may see still  more outbreaks linked to romaine lettuce and other leafy greens in the years  ahead.
Sandra Eskin directs The Pew  Charitable Trusts’ work on food safety.
