Forget sheep - we should graze cattle, pigs and bison on England's hills, says Defra adviser
Hill farmers should swap their sheep for cattle, pigs and bison to save the country's uplands, a senior Government adviser has said as ministers launch plans for a new trees strategy.
Ben Goldsmith, a board member of the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, said that replacing sheep with cattle would restore woods to some of the most beautiful parts of England.
The news came as Lord Goldsmith of Richmond Park, the Environment minister, launched a plan for new woods to be established around towns and cities, and along rivers to create wildlife corridors.
England's uplands have long been a source of controversy. When the Lake District was designated a World Heritage Site by Unesco three years ago, the writer George Monbiot, who accused Unesco of trying to reinforce the area’s appearance as a “sheep-wrecked wet desert”.
However writing for the Farmer's Guardian this week, Mr Goldsmith unveiled himself as an unlikely ally of Mr Monbiot in the battle to reintroduce a greater diversity of plant and wildlife.
Mr Goldsmith wrote: "Across most of Britain, especially in our upland landscapes, intensive farming is simply not viable without subsidies.
"The environmental cost of trying to make it work has been catastrophic. Millions of sheep have almost entirely stripped hills and valleys of their green mantle.
"With the exception of small pockets, trees, scrub, wildflowers and birdsong are largely absent.
"People think of our upland National Parks as great nature reserves, but they are not. Sadly, there is often less wildlife in these parts of the UK than in surrounding areas."
Lake District hill farming landscape in Cumbria. Credit: Dylan News Images / Alamy Stock Photo
He added: "The removal of each of these in turn has triggered total ecological collapse across the British uplands – and most notably in the fabled Highlands of Scotland, probably the most ecologically degraded landscape in all Europe."
Mr Goldsmith added that "the browsing, grazing and trampling of native cattle prevents the darkness of the tree canopy from closing over the landscape".
He added: "Wilder farming is as close to a silver bullet for the future management of our marginal lands as we’ll find. It is time to embrace this new way."
Farmers reacted frostily to Mr Goldsmith's suggestion. NFU uplands forum chairman Thomas Binns said: “Hill farmers have been delivering for nature for decades, alongside producing safe, traceable and affordable food for the nation. This partnership has helped to create the mosaic landscape we see and love in the uplands today.
“To suggest hill farming as ‘intensive’ is simply wrong. Cattle and sheep have extensively grazed these areas for generations, cared for by farmers passionate about the environment they farm.
"Whether it is creating habitat for wildlife, setting aside areas of land for wildflowers, planting trees or hedgerows or maintaining drystone walls and upland hay meadows, every farmer wants to leave their farm in a better condition for the next generation."
Separarately writing in the newly published National Trees Strategy, Lord Goldsmith - who is also Mr Goldsmith's brother - set out a vision for more forests in England.
He said that he wants to see more “planting in urban areas, integrating trees and woodlands into farmland, creating large new forests and harnessing the power of natural processes to establish woodlands where appropriate.
“I am especially excited by the potential of woodlands to connect areas and create wildlife corridors across the landscape, particularly alongside our water courses.”
