An artist's impression of the plans.
But they will come at a cost with limited car parking, noise concerns and one of the blocks being less than seven metres away from a bedroom of a neighbouring care home - the recommended separation is 18 metres.
Councillors at June 24 planning committee meeting of Rugby Borough Council were told that the plans for the 360 apartments were the best opportunity to utilise the site which had lain derelict for 12 years.
Planning officer Chris Kingham explained that building options were limited due to developments on other parts of the old cattle market and existing drainage channels. That was why the scheme consisted of four blocks ranging between four and six storeys in height.
He added that the apartments would be rented out and marketed to young professionals who could take advantage of the town’s railway station being just 100 metres away.
Mr Lowde explained: “The Private Rented Sector (PRS) is one of the types of tenure that is experiencing growth, particularly within larger urban areas.
“The developer notes the intention that the scheme would be a long-term investment under one ownership rather than apartments being sold to different individual owners to then rent. They therefore want to provide high-quality and well-managed rental accommodation with tenant-friendly and long-term leases.”
The officer outlined some of the problems facing the development.
Lack of space meant just 144 parking spaces would be provided - just over half of what is recommended for so many apartments - while the borough council’s environmental health officer commented that they were concerned the development could be an ‘acoustic prison’ where residents always had to keep windows closed to avoid exposure to noise.
But Mr Lowde added: “A number of attempts have been made to secure the redevelopment of the site, but none have been implemented.
"The submitted scheme represents a significant opportunity to realise the potential of this site which is in a prominent and highly sustainable location.
"Refusal would invariably result in the site remaining derelict for the near future. None of the economic and social benefits would therefore be realised.”
Councillors agreed with Cllr David Cranham (Con, Hillmorton) adding: “This is a derelict site in desperate need of regeneration, It is also a constrained site and I think the architect should pat himself on the back - he’s done a very good job.”
Cllr Noreen New (Lib Dem, Paddox) raised concerns about lack of car parking with the development adding to an existing problem in the area but Cllr Ian Picker (Con, Hillmorton) had a different view.
He said: “There is definitely an issue in this area with traffic but I think that actually limiting the available parking at this site will help that overall, So in my mind that is a point in favour of this.”
For more details of the plans, visit Rugby's planning portal at planning.agileapplications.co.uk/rugby and search for reference R19/0804.
