Asparagopsis armata at the Cawthron Institute. Photograph: The Cawthron Institute, supplied
“Other products typically provide reductions of between 10% and 20%,” he said. “Australian research estimates that if just 10% of global ruminant producers adopted Asparagopsis as an additive to feed their livestock, it would have the same impact for our climate as removing 50 million cars from the world’s roads.”
There are more cows than people in New Zealand and while they have become a mainstay of the economy they also draw the ire of environmentalists for their high emissions profile, intensive impact on the land and muddying and polluting waterwarys.
Oback says specialised breeding programmes can “take decades” to reach their desired outcome, but using genetic modification his team can design a climate-smart cow much more quickly and precisely – though the process remains controversial.
As well as working towards manipulating the genes that control methane admissions , Oback is also focused on designing cattle that will thrive in a climate-altered future – animals that are more heat tolerant, hardy and productive.
The five-year programme is only three months in, but is already targeting coat colour adapation – creating cows that are lighter in colour, making them more heat-tolerant.
An important feature of the programme was using “elite” cattle, Oback said, so not only would they emit less methane and be climate adaptive – they’d also be super performers.
Reach ‘peak meat’ by 2030 to tackle climate crisis, say scientists
“We’re taking a high-performing elite dairy background, and then we’re putting mutations on top of it.”
Oback’s work is intertwined with Rowe’s research into low emitting sheep in the south of the country. For Oback to study – and try to manipulate – the genes of low-emitting stock, he is invested in the survival of Rowe’s flocks, who are now in their third generation.
Rowe and her team’s work is creating a buzz in the agricultural community, because not only do her sheep have low methane emissions, they also produce more wool and are shown to be hardier and healthier than normal sheep. At this point no-one knowns why, but 20 major breeders have already signed on to produce flocks, and the low-emission sheep have the backing of industry body Beef and Lamb New Zealand.
