The GB cattle population at 1 April 2020 was smaller than at the same point in 2019, according to data from British Cattle Movement Service. The total number of cattle under 30 months was back by around 74,500 head. The number of adult cattle also fell.
In the short term the number of prime cattle available for beef production (beef animals of both sexes and dairy males, allowing for suckler cow replacements) aged between 12 and 30 months is down by almost 75,000 head.
Looking a little further ahead the number under 12 months is up just over 3,000 head. Notable within the yearling age category is a decline in dairy males, but an uplift in beef types. In part, this is a reflection of the increased usage of sorted semen in the dairy industry.
In the breeding herd there has been some contraction compared to April 2019. The number of dairy females over 30 months stands 49,000 head lower. It is a similar story with beef females over 30 months, down nearly 24,000 head on-the-year.
Should the trend for contraction in the breeding herds continue, then there could be some support for prime animal numbers. However, any production gains from a reduction in demand for replacements is unlikely to be enough to offset the overall decline in prime numbers.
You can subscribe to receive Beef and Lamb market news straight to your inbox. Simply fill in your contact details on our online form.
The UK wheat crop is expected to be smaller year-on-year, with UK crop conditions now varying across regions.
After several weeks of sharp rises, GB cattle prices were largely steady this week.
The drought in Australia has ended, and cattle farmers there are now looking to restock which limit production this year.
The post-coronavirus recovery of Ireland’s beef throughputs could cast uncertainty over GB prices.
Prime cattle supplies have picked up slightly, attracted by the higher prices, but also perhaps by farmers looking to take the pressure off available grazing.
In April, both UK imports and exports of fresh/frozen beef fell 15% year-on-year.
Overall the disruption and uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to continue for many more months. For a second consecutive year, global meat production is expected to contract.
Deadweight cattle prices continued to climb during the week ending 13 June.
UK beef and veal production in May totalled 67,700 tonnes, down 13% year-on-year.
The lack of rainfall, particularly across England and Wales, has started to seriously restrict grass growth.
The GB all-prime average price rose 8p in the week ending 6 June to 353.0p/kg.
Beef production in the EU was down 0.4% in March compared to the previous year.
Red meat demand appears to have bounced back and is now overall slightly up year-on-year. Beef and pork have both recorded growth, while lamb is steady.
Across the board GB deadweight cattle prices have continued on an upwards trend. During the week ending 30 May, the all-prime average measure increased 7.5p week-on-week.
The GB cattle population at 1 April 2020 was smaller than at the same point in 2019, according to data from British Cattle Movement Service. The total number of cattle under 30 months was back by around 74,500 head.
The UK retail market currently prices mince and top cuts slightly differently than other countries, including those operating in the global beef market.
There have been many significant challenges in the US beef market since March.
The continued lack of significant rainfall in the UK has raised concerns for the quality of the quality of the planted crop.
The all-prime GB average price rose 7.7p on the week, to average 337.6p/kg.
