Agrigenomics market worldwide is projected to grow by US$6. 8 Billion, driven by a compounded growth of 7. 5%. Crops, one of the segments analyzed and sized in this study, displays the potential to grow at over 7.
7%. The shifting dynamics supporting this growth makes it critical for businesses in this space to keep abreast of the changing pulse of the market. Poised to reach over US$13 Billion by the year 2025, Crops will bring in healthy gains adding significant momentum to global growth.
- Representing the developed world, the United States will maintain a 8.5% growth momentum. Within Europe, which continues to remain an important element in the world economy, Germany will add over US$313.3 Million to the region’s size and clout in the next 5 to 6 years. Over US$319.2 Million worth of projected demand in the region will come from Rest of Europe markets. In Japan, Crops will reach a market size of US$961.3 Million by the close of the analysis period. As the world’s second largest economy and the new game changer in global markets, China exhibits the potential to grow at 7.2% over the next couple of years and add approximately US$1.2 Billion in terms of addressable opportunity for the picking by aspiring businesses and their astute leaders. Presented in visually rich graphics are these and many more need-to-know quantitative data important in ensuring quality of strategy decisions, be it entry into new markets or allocation of resources within a portfolio. Several macroeconomic factors and internal market forces will shape growth and development of demand patterns in emerging countries in Asia-Pacific. All research viewpoints presented are based on validated engagements from influencers in the market, whose opinions supersede all other research methodologies.
- Competitors identified in this market include, among others,
Global NGS In Agrigenomics Market: Percentage Breakdown of
Global Population in Thousands by Region for the Years 1960,
Developing Countries for the Years 2000, 2010, 2020, 2030,
Integration of Bioinformatics and Genomics in Plant Breeding:
Global Market for NGS in Agrigenomics: Market Size in US$
Million for the Years 2019, 2021, 2023 and 2025
Amidst the Growing Threat of Climate Change on Food Security,
With Demand for Animal-based Foods Continuing to Grow, Genomics
Domestication of Wheat and Barley Crops through Genomics: A Review
