WARNING – GRAPHIC IMAGES: Horrific images of desiccated cow carcasses scattered across a paddock have revealed the stark reality facing mistreated livestock.
RSPCA NSW shared a number of disturbing images to its Facebook page of a malnourished bullock and cow with their ribs and backbones clearly visible.
Another photo showed dozens of decrepit bodies strewn across a dry field.
The RSPCA shared the photos to highlight the animal cruelty livestock is succumbing to during the drought, with more than a thousand cattle seized in NSW.
On November 25 the RSPCA started seizing 1000 to 1200 head of cattle on five properties in Binnaway, in the NSW Central West.
A malnourished cow was one of more than 1000 seized from properties in NSW. Source: RSPCA NSW
The seizure occurred after the RSPCA received six animal cruelty complaints back in 2018, alleging serious welfare concerns in relation to about 1500 head of cattle.
“Our inspectors visited the properties on 10 occasions between June 2018 and July 2019 along with Local Land Services NSW District Veterinarians,” the RSPCA wrote on Facebook.
“Legally enforceable written directions were issued in relation to destocking throughout that period; however the owner did not comply with these directions within a suitable time frame, which seriously affected the welfare of the animals remaining on the property.”
The RSPCA said a stock welfare panel to offer expert veterinarian advice was established to address the matter in August this year.
The owner of the livestock was instructed in September to manage, feed and adequately care for the cattle and failure to comply would end in cattle being seized and sold.
About 800 cattle died while many others were found distressed. Source: RSCPA NSW
It was later found the owner did not comply and about 800 cattle died, while the surviving cattle were distressed or at risk of becoming distressed.
The cattle were then seized. The RSPCA acknowledged the drought had played a part in the struggles farmers face to keep livestock alive, but no animal should suffer as a result.
“We work closely with many farmers across the state, assisting with stock management plans, advice and support, including providing connections to farmers for veterinarians and mental health assistance, sourcing feed, assisting in destocking and manning stock welfare panels,” the RSPCA wrote on Facebook.
“Difficult decisions about whether to feed, agist or sell animals must be made sooner rather than later. Once an animal’s welfare is comprised and they are no longer ‘fit to load’, options are severely limited.
If you have any concerns for the welfare of an animal, no matter the circumstances, the RSPCA encourages you to contact us on 1300 278 3589 so we can help.
Do you have a story tip? Email: newsroomau@yahoonews.com .
