Get these newsletters delivered to your inbox & more info about our products & services. Privacy Policy & Terms of Use
"That increase in pet ownership also drives the humanization of pets," she said. "The majority of pet owners today prefer to be called 'pet parents' and they refer to their pets as 'fur babies.' That's all you need to know in terms of how they want to treat and interact with their pets."
As a result, companion animal segments of health companies like Zoetis and Idexx have flourished.
Zoetis stock ranks second among pharmaceutical companies in the list of 35 stocks that make up IBD's Medical-Ethical Drug industry group. The Parsippany, N.J., company holds a Composite Rating of 94 out of a best-possible 99. This means Zoetis stock is outperforming 95% of all stocks in terms of key technical and fundamental metrics.
On a year-to-date basis, Zoetis stock is up almost 45%. That's better than double the pace of the Nasdaq, and far above pharma stocks as a whole, which have edged a fraction higher over the same period.
The performance is partly because animal-health companies don't face the same pains frustrating most of the pharma industry, Goldman Sachs analyst Nathan Rich said in a September report. He has a buy rating on Zoetis stock and a neutral rating on Idexx stock.
"We think the animal-health space will continue to be viewed as attractive among healthcare investors, given its lack of political/regulatory risk and insulation from drug-pricing overhangs , especially heading into an election year (providing a haven for investors when other healthcare historically underperforms)," he said.
Merck, the massive diversified pharmaceuticals maker, ranks fourth in the industry group, with an 89 Composite Rating. It generated $1.12 billion in second-quarter animal-health sales , up 3% on an as-reported basis.
Idexx stock lands in a different bucket of health companies working in medical systems and equipment. It carries a Composite Rating of 89 and its shares have climbed 44% since the start of the year. The industry group on Wednesday ranked a bullish No. 23 out of 197 groups IBD tracks .
Experts generally expect the overall animal-health industry will grow in the mid-single-digit range.
Goldman Sachs' Rich calls for organic growth of 6%, based on nine animal health companies. That's generally in line with 7% organic growth over the last three years, he said.
Growth in the market's diagnostics segment — testing tools, equipment and supplies — is expected to be even stronger. Idexx expects to grow more than 10% organically each year. During its investor day presentation, Idexx pinned its potential addressable market at $33 billion for 2018. Chief Executive Jay Mazelsky says the industry has only developed about 10% of that potential.
So far, the projections appear to be panning out in 2019. What remains consistent across the slew of health companies is that sales of products for companion animals — pets — is outgrowing livestock-related sales, which include vaccines, antibiotics and other medicines.
Across four major publicly traded companies with animal-health businesses, companion animals drew more than $2.1 billion in second-quarter sales. That compares to $1.89 billion in sales for those same companies' products that treat livestock. All four companies reported sliding livestock market sales.
Pet ownership is bolstering these trends. Pet parents are becoming more savvy, Zoetis Chief Financial Officer Glenn David told IBD. They often crowdsource information on social media and use online services from Chewy ( CHWY ) and PetMed Express ( PETS ) to fulfill food and medicine orders for their pets.
"As the middle class grows and expands globally, that also expands their willingness to spend on their pets," he said. "Pets are becoming more and more part of the family as they move from the backyard to the bed. We've seen that in many of the developed markets and the emerging markets as well."
Zoetis is moving deeper into this market with its parasiticide, dubbed Simparica Trio. The three-drug combination aims to prevent heartworms and lungworms, and treat fleas, ticks and a stomach parasite in one chewable tablet for dogs. Simparica Trio gained European regulatory approval recently.
Credit Suisse analyst Erin Wright estimated in a September report Simparica Trio could generate $133 million in 2020 sales and $258 million in 2021 sales. Zoetis estimates the current parasiticide market for dogs is worth more than $4 billion.
Goldman Sachs' Rich is even more bullish.
"We think Simparica Trio could be the first $1 billion plus animal-health drug, setting a new bar for blockbusters in the animal-health space," he said. As it stands, that industry defines a blockbuster as a drug that generates $10 million or more in annual sales.
Another market factor: Rover and Lassie are expected to live longer today, Elanco's Lin said. Like humans, geriatric pets experience issues with arthritis, pain and cancer as they grow older, she said.
"Because they live longer, they start to have chronic disease, just like humans do," she said. "Pets can't talk and they live longer. They suffer from pain. So, how do we help them to recognize pain in the early stages and give them appropriate treatment?"
In a recent survey, Goldman Sachs' Rich says 48% of veterinarians identified pain therapy as the most important need in animal health. Nearly a third, 28%, said skin issues are also tricky for pet owners. Among animal health companies, he sees Zoetis as a leader in both areas.
To that end, Zoetis is teamed up with Regeneron Pharmaceuticals ( REGN ) to study monoclonal antibodies for use in pain treatment of dogs and cats . Zoetis' David notes pain in cats can be a tremendous problem for pet owners and veterinarians.
"Monoclonal antibodies for cats will provide significant new innovations to the market," David said. He noted the health company is looking into monoclonal antibodies for dogs as well.
While pets may be driving much of the industry's growth, livestock remains the big breadwinner for now for animal health companies.
Sales of animal-health products for livestock are projected to track population growth. The International Fund for Agricultural Development estimates 795 million people are undernourished. This means a massive growth runway remains for products that treat food animals.
"The aforementioned statistics exemplify the urgent requirement to expand food supply though large-scale adoption of livestock," Grand View Research said in a report.
Livestock sales have languished in 2019 as African swine fever has hit China hard. The country said it had lost more than 100 million pigs to the disease as of July, according to CNN. Zoetis expects a $50 million impact to sales this year. But the health company also expects to recoup that in 2020.
Meanwhile, Elanco's Lin says demands are shifting for livestock producers. Despite the burgeoning popularity of non-animal protein sources — such as fast-growing sales of the Impossible Burger — people are still looking for "healthy" real meat sources, like fish and poultry.
Elanco doesn't break out its livestock sales to that degree. But Zoetis said second-quarter revenue from products that treat fish and poultry grew a respective 4% and 11%. Meanwhile, sales of medicines for cattle and swine tumbled 4% apiece.
"Despite these alternative proteins that might be on the rise, livestock and protein production continue to grow at a very healthy rate," Lin said. Consumers are saying, "not just red meat, but we want healthy protein. Our definition is seafood as well as poultry, and we see that growing at a very healthy pace."
Among animal health companies, Merck plans to report third-quarter results Oct. 29. Idexx reports earnings Oct. 31. Elanco is scheduled to report Nov. 6, with Zoetis' earnings report due Nov. 7.
