In the battle against inhumane livestock conditions, Temple Grandin was way ahead of the curve.
Since as early as 1965, she's been working towards more humane cattle facilities, with her ideas making her one of Time Magazine's most influential people in the world.
Professor Grandin believes her autism — or what she calls her "cow's-eye view" — has been her special tool, providing a unique insight into how animals see the world.
In fact, she believes they see the world in the same way she does.
Temple Grandin says her career is accurately represented in the film about her life, in which she is played by Claire Danes (right).
She empathises with cows in particular, and says that's enabled her to understand what makes them distracted or stressed, and what calms them.
And in helping farmers around the world improve their treatment of cattle, Professor Grandin learnt that some of the things that alleviate animals' stress, reduced hers, too.
Take a look at how a child, whom doctors thought should be institutionalised, went on to become a world-renowned expert in the field of animal science.
It's perhaps unusual that someone raised in an urban, rather than agricultural, environment could inspire a rethink of farms around the world with her cattle station designs.
Yet, by her mid teens, Professor Grandin, who was born just outside Boston, had "never been west of the Mississippi".
Hear more from Temple Grandin and how she developed her world-renowned designs.
At 15, she visited Arizona to stay on her uncle and aunt's farm and noticed the cattle there were, at times, quite agitated.
She says her autism, which causes her to think "visually", gave her a unique insight into what was impacting the cows.
In a 2010 TED Talk, which has amassed over 5 million views, Professor Grandin explains that she doesn't think in language, but rather in pictures, which has been a "tremendous asset" to her.
"Visual thinking gave me a whole lot of insight into the animal mind," she explains during the talk.
"An animal is a sensory-based thinker, not verbal. [It] thinks in pictures, thinks in sounds, thinks in smells."
Professor Grandin says for animals, sensory-based information is placed into categories, and says she shares this compartmentalised way of thinking.
She can also relate to the cattle's stress.
"When I got into puberty and I went out to the ranch when I was 15, I started having horrible panic attacks and anxiety," she says.
She noticed that stressed cattle relaxed inside the tight confines of a "squeeze chute" — or cattle crush, as it's known in Australia — a cage that holds livestock while they're examined.
She wondered if it might have the same impact on a person.
"I went to try it," she says.
"So then I built a device that I could get into that applies pressure," she says.
It was a rubber-padded machine that she could use herself.
She says pressure "doesn't work with everybody", but is a sensation many people with autism derive comfort from.
