Several unofficial cattle markets have started to mushroom in the city and cantonment areas of Rawalpindi in recent days, in stark contrast to the directions issued by the district administration for limiting the sale of sacrificial animals to a few selected markets.
The district administration had decided to set up 16 cattle markets in the city where strict precautionary guidelines against the spread of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) would be implemented.
These markets will be established on Adiala Road, Sawan Camp, around the Grand Trunk (GT) Road, Rawat, Johar Chowk, Pirwadhai, Chakri Road, New Katarian, Pirwadhai Mor and one in every seven tehsils of the district. They are expected to be established in the first 10 days of next month.
Moreover, due to the Covid-19 pandemic, the district administration has decided to waive all charges and taxes on cattle vendors. However, this concession has come with a decision to impose a strict ban on selling cattle at locations other than the designated markets.
This, however, has not stopped traders from setting up markets in different neighbourhoods of the city and even going door-to-door with their flock.
The unauthorised markets have emerged at Dhoke Dalal Bridge, Double Road, Shamsabad, IJ Principal Road, Ghazni Road, Adiala Road, Akaal Garh, High Court Road and Banni Chowk.
Meanwhile, a market survey by The Express Tribune revealed that despite the pandemic, the prices of sacrificial animals have skyrocketed.
A small and lean bull, which was sold for around Rs80,000 last year, is selling for more than Rs125,000 this year.
Moreover, a middle-sized bull sold last Eidul Azha for less than Rs130,000, was being sold for more than Rs150,000. The healthier animals are being sold for around Rs200,000. Similarly, a small goat was selling at Rs75,000, while an average-sized one is selling for Rs90,000 and large goats are being sold for Rs100,000 - almost Rs30,000 more than last year.
All religious organizations have started taking bookings for collective sacrifice. The minimum sacrificial share is being sold at Rs12,000, while prices for a share go as high as Rs18,000 to Rs20,000.
However, the sale of animals is almost non-existent at the moment as most residents turn away after hearing the prices. However, the trade of sacrificial animals is expected to pick up as July progresses.
Published in The Express Tribune, June 30th, 2020.
