The impact of Covid-19 on the beef sector has been revealed in figures published by the Department of Agriculture.
Since the beginning of March the weekly cattle kill in Ireland has fallen from nearly 38,000 to just over 25,000.
The figures published this lunchtime by the Department of Agriculture indicate the large decrease in beef being produced as export markets close and the food service sector remains in lockdown.
The temporary closure of McDonalds, Supermacs and other big meat buyers last months was a huge blow to the sector, as they are some of the biggest meat buyers.
The food service industry across Europe is in shutdown which has meant a huge decrease in demand from commercial buyers.
Retail demand is way up, but nowhere near enough to make up the shortfall.
RTÉ News is aware that many meat processors have shut down significant parts of their operation.
However, Lidl has confirmed today that it will export twenty percent more Irish beef this year.
It's selling the meat at its outlets across Europe and the US.
Lidl Ireland and their exclusive beef supplier, Cavan-based Liffey Meats, have secured exports to the value of €14 million, an increase of 20% on 2019 figures.
The deal will see 17 fresh and frozen Bord Bia Quality Assured products exported over the next 12 months to Lidl stores in the USA and around Europe; a welcome announcement as the beef industry has faced a turbulent 12 months.
Managing Director for Lidl Ireland & Northern Ireland, John Paul Scally says: "At Lidl, supporting and developing our local supplier network has always been a priority for us and now, more than ever, we are committed to investing in our partners.
"With our commitment and support they can strengthen their supply chains, build their capacity and workforce to supply not only the island of Ireland, but more than 18 countries across Europe and the U.S. with quality Irish beef."
Ciaran Beirne of Liffey Meats said: "Our longstanding partnership with Lidl has allowed us to develop our business significantly over the past number of years, and this opportunity to leverage new international markets is a game changer for our business.
"We are extremely grateful to Lidl for the ongoing support and investment, particularly now in these unprecedented times. We look forward bringing premium Irish grass-fed beef to consumers across the globe."
Beef prices are at a ten year low with farmers struggling to make a profit from producing beef and many have said that unless prices increase they will be forced out of the business.
The European Commission is coming under mounting pressure this week from member states to introduce support schemes to assist the agri-food sector.
Today, dairy processors are warning that output could drop by more than two billion Euro in Ireland if support measures aren't put in place.
