Iowa Attorney General Tom Miller joined other state attorneys general in calling Tuesday for a federal investigation into suspected price fixing among beef processors.
In a letter to U.S. Attorney General William Barr , Miller and the top prosecutors from nine other states asked the U.S. Department of Justice to look into whether the country's biggest beef processors are colluding against cattle ranchers and consumers. The attorneys general said the price of boxed beef remains "healthy" even as cattle futures have dropped.
Cargill, JBS USA, National Beef and Tyson Foods account for about 80% of beef processing in the United States.
"Given the concentrated market structure of the beef industry it may be particularly susceptible to market manipulation, particularly during times of food insecurity, such as the current COVID-19 crisis," the attorneys general wrote.
Miller's counterparts from Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Maine, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota and Wyoming also signed the letter.
U.S. Sen. Mike Rounds, R-South Dakota, also had asked for an investigation.
Liz Croston, a Tyson Foods spokeswoman, said at the time that while retail beef demand was up, orders from food service customers, such as restaurants, were at a standstill.
Ranchers are selling live cattle for about $93.05 per 100 pounds on the Chicago Board of Trade's August futures market as of Monday. That's down from $116.35 at the beginning of the year.
At the same time, average price of boxed beef has doubled, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. At the end of February, 100 pounds of boxed beef cost about $205. By Monday afternoon, the same amount sold for $410.
Iowa State University Agriculture Economist Chad Hart said the two markets should not be conflated, as the attorneys general did in their letter to Barr on Tuesday. Producers won't pay as much for live cattle because they don't have places to put them, given production slowdowns at slaughterhouses amid coronavirus outbreaks. Meanwhile, grocery stores need more fresh meat than they used to as consumers dine out much less.
There was about 500 million pounds of beef in cold storage as of February. But, Hart said, the frozen beef doesn't translate easily to grocery stores. The meat is packaged in bigger quantities, intended for shipments to restaurants or other countries.
The beef is also not as fresh as what consumers expect from grocery stores.
"You look at the individual markets themselves, the prices make sense," Hart said.
Ranchers selling 1,200-pound cows will see about $280 less per head than they did at the beginning of the year. Worse, they are actually taking a loss on those sales.
Iowa State University Agriculture Economist Dermot Hayes said the cost to raise cattle right now is about $116 per 100 pounds, given the price for feed and other necessary supplies. The current market rate would amount to a loss of about $23 per 100 pounds.
Even before the coronavirus outbreaks, ranchers were already looking at a tight market, made tighter by a fire that shut down Tyson Foods' Holcomb, Kansas, beef processing plant last August.
"We have been getting by with not enough packing plant capacity for a long time," he said.
Tyler Jett covers jobs and the economy for the Register. Contact him at 515-284-8215 and tjett@registermedia.com . Follow him on Twitter @LetsJett .
Your support makes work like this possible. Subscribe at DesMoinesRegister.com/Deal .
