The battle for ownership of a huge cattle station in Australia's north has angered the area's native title holders who wanted to buy the property for themselves to protect the culturally significant Fitzroy River.
Jubilee Downs, 400 kilometres east of Broome, is the first station to come up for grabs in WA's Kimberley region in nearly four years and is expected to fetch well over $30 million.
Elders real estate agent, Greg Smith, said the shortlisted bidders include Australian and overseas-owned companies.
The stations span 221,408 hectares of the Kimberley's cattle country with 90 kilometres of access to the Fitzroy River.
He would not confirm whether Gina Rinehart's Hancock Agriculture, which owns neighbouring cattle station Fossil Downs, or media mogul Kerry Stokes, who also owns substantial cattle property in the region, were on the shortlist.
But he said the station was highly sought after due to its location on the Fitzroy River and its 11,000 head of droughtmaster cattle, which are in demand in the live export trade.
"Eleven thousand cattle alone, on the back of an envelope, are worth $11 million, and that's very conservative," Mr Smith said.
The native title holders of the land that the Jubilee station lease covers say they want to protect sacred sites.
As the sale negotiations come to a head, Aboriginal people whose native title rights over the area were recognised in 2018 have spoken out about being sidelined from the process.
Yanunijarra Aboriginal Corporation chief executive Peter Murray said the Yi-Martuwarra traditional owners, along with investors including the US-based Nature Conservancy and the Kimberley Agriculture and Pastoral Company offered $25 million but were knocked out in the first round of the negotiations.
Mr Murray said the consortium's business plan combined the cattle business with the protection of heritage sites, including the Fitzroy River.
"That was the main focus, we were going to turn it into conservation management, to protect those sites," Mr Murray said.
"We thought we were in the best position, being the traditional owners.
Peter Murray of the Yanunijarra Aboriginal Corporation says the traditional owner bid was dismissed too quickly.
Jubilee Downs also comprises the Quanbun Downs lease and the two stations have been run for many years as one entity by Keith and Karen Anderson.
The Andersons own the property in partnership with Texan billionaire and environmentalist, Edward Bass.
One of the native title holders, Anthony McLarty, whose grandmother worked as a station hand on Jubilee Downs, said the traditional owners wanted to buy the pastoral lease to provide much-needed employment for the younger generation.
"We've been cattle people for a long time, we know the business and we need to start skilling up our young people," he said.
"When we don't even get considered, it's a slap in the face."
Mr McLarty said with the change of ownership, he was also concerned about the future of sacred sites within a 45,000-hectare flood plain known as Alexander Island.
Anthony McLarty (right) says the his people want to protect the Fitzroy River because it's a sacred site.
"We have plans for this land but we can't compete with billionaires who can pay more than the working value of these properties," Mr McLarty said.
Once a buyer is identified, the transfer of the pastoral lease will need approval by either the Director General of WA's Department of Lands or the Lands Minister, Ben Wyatt, who is also the state's Minister for Indigenous Affairs.
The Yi-Martuwarra say the flood plain known as Alexander Island is an important cultural site.
It took the Yi-Martuwarra six years to have their native title rights recognised over the area.
But they only have non-exclusive rights over the stations, otherwise known as "shared rights".
Nature Conservancy's Australian director, Richard Gilmore, said the best outcome would be for the land to be returned to its traditional owners because, he said, they would guarantee the protection of the 700-kilometre-long Fitzroy River which was under pressure from a push by the pastoral industry to harness water for irrigation.
"We think the only way to guarantee an outcome in the national interest that preserves one of the most important tropical rivers left in the world and the traditional owners' interests would be to secure those properties for their conservation and cultural values," Mr Gilmore said.
Conservation group, Environs Kimberley, held a rally with traditional owners in October 2019 calling on the Government to protect the Fitzroy.
Mr Smith said he could not comment on the native title holders' offer and why it had not been included on the shortlist.
"When we got down to looking at all of the offers on their terms and conditions and values, they didn't make it across the line," he said.
"The process has been conducted completely on commercial grounds.
"And with 14 expressions of interest, we had to try and narrow the field down a bit.
Mr Smith said the negotiations were in the final stages and expected the sale to be wrapped up by next week.
Much of the cattle across the Kimberley is bound for live export to Indonesia.
