The farmers can contact KFL for its products to be delivered within two days, according to K S Indusekharan Nair, chairman of the company.
State-owned Kerala Feeds Ltd ( KFL ) is facilitating supply of cattle fodder to dairy farmers who are suffering from a shortage of the produce owing to the nationwide lockdown aimed at combating the deadly coronavirus.
The farmers can contact KFL for its products to be delivered within two days, according to K S Indusekharan Nair, chairman of the company.
The company is back to normal functioning after a change in work schedule following the shutdown since March 24, KFL managing director B Sreekumar said. “Our production units at Kozhikode, Kallettumkara (Thrissur district) and Karunagappally (Kollam district) have resumed full-fledged operation,” he added. Together, the three units produce 1,250 tonnes of cattle feed every day.
A majority of the state’s cattle farms customarily produce feed in their own premises. The lockdown has led them to face an acute shortage of raw materials for the feed. “KFL is particular that no dairy farmer faces a problem with milk production. That is why we have come up with this solution,” the MD added.
Since both the union and state governments have categorised dairy as an essential sector, it faces no hindrance in production or distribution during the lockdown, Sreekumar pointed out.
The 1995-founded KFL, which is headquartered in Kallettumkara near Irinjalakuda, has a range of products that cater to different breeds of cows with the aim of keeping them in good health as well as better productivity and quality of milk.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
