You have run out of free articles. You can support our newsroom by joining at our lowest rate!
Enjoy more articles from Lincoln's Most Trusted Information Source. Subscribers can log in for unlimited digital access
Jay and Carol Boyer established Boyer Cattle Company near Liberty in 1982.
Jay Boyer has an apron from the Liberty Lumber Yard that was in business when he and his wife's home was built in the 1950s.
The wall of the shop at Boyer Cattle Company displays tools that Jay's dad used on the farm.
LIBERTY — For 38 years, a family farm near Liberty has been raising quality cattle.
Jay and Carol Boyer established Boyer Cattle Company in 1982.
Jay explained that the Limousin breed of beef cattle came from France in the early 1970s with a few other breeds.
“Dad bought his first Limousin bull in the late '70s to cross with Herefords to eliminate pink eye, and he liked the calving ease,” Jay Boyer said. “He liked the cross, and that’s where the Limousin breed started in the Boyer family.”
Jay’s parents had bought the home farm when he returned from World War II.
“Mom always told the story that the house had all the windows boarded up and was used as an oats bin,” Jay said. “The current house was one of the first ranch-style houses in the area. Everything came from the Liberty Lumber Yard in 1954-55.”
“How they raised six kids in this house with one bathroom is beyond me,” Carol added.
The couple purchased the home farm in 1991 when Jay's mom moved to Beatrice, but he had been raising his own cattle since 1983. The cattle were purebred Limousin, but now the couple has mostly Lim-flex animals, which is a Limousin crossed with a red or black Angus.
“I’m trying to breed an animal that works best for my customers,” Jay said. “They like the heavier muscle Limousin. When you have a higher-percentage Limousin breed, you get a heavier-muscled animal, better feed efficiency and better temperament.”
“The meat is very lean and healthy,” Carol said.
The Boyers will host their 29th annual spring sale in March.
“It’s always been a family sale,” Jay said. “It started as the Boyer Brothers Bull Sale with my brother, Kent, from North Platte. During the last few years all of the kids and their spouses have helped with the sale in different ways. We have friends that help, too.
“We do all the food, too,” Carol added. “If I didn’t have the kids to help, I don’t think I could do this.”
The video-sale auction will include cows and bulls, including guest consignments. It's held at the farm.
“I’ve sold to customers in Kentucky and Oklahoma, but most of my customers are within a 150-mile radius,” Jay said.
The Boyers have a fall herd and a spring herd for space and because some of the regular customers like age-advantaged bulls.
“I’m going to shoot for 30 years of sales, but then I’m thinking of going back to a private treaty day,” Jay said. “We have enough cattle and farm ground to keep me busy and out of trouble. I like this life. I like the baby calves and watching them grow. You have to like what you do.”
