The South Canterbury Hunt club members on a previous hunt with Ryan Smith leading as hunt master.
A Timaru lifestyle block owner was livid after he spent an hour coaxing his cattle back to his property after they were spooked by the South Canterbury Hunt club​ on Saturday.
Bryan Prestidge​ said the group's hounds barked as they made their way along Daniels Rd, Otipua, frightening his three head of cattle which were grazing along the front of his land within a hot wired cordon.
At first, he said he thought the noise could be some rogue dogs worrying his animals.
Upon inspection, he found one beast had jumped the wire into one of his paddocks and the other two had barged through two fences and were one electric wire from his neighbours dairy herd.
"It took me about an hour to get them (cattle) back, I was pretty peeved off."
Another neighbour's horse took fright and was found about 10 metres away from State Highway 1, he said.
A previous South Canterbury Hunt Club event.
Prestidge said he was disappointed the club, which was heading to a nearby farm to hunt, did not notify the neighbourhood of its intentions ahead of time.
The South Canterbury Hunt Inc hunt master Nick Rowley said it was an unfortunate situation, and he had apologised.
"It was unfortunate during the early stage of the hunt the hounds drifted into a built-up lifestyle area running out of our preferred boundary.
Rowely said the Hunt has an arrangement with local landowners where permission is obtained to hunt over their farms.
"I have spoken to the owner of the cattle apologising for this situation, of which my apology was accepted," Rowley said.
"During the discussion with the cattle owner, it was agreed that a mailbox drop of a flyer notifying lifestyle block owners of the Hunt's expected presence in the area in the future would be a good idea," he said.
The South Canterbury Hunt club out on a hunt. (File photo)
"It was an honour to see so many children attending this hunt and gaining confidence on their ponies jumping in a group, as well as many adult riders on young horses. We really appreciate the opportunity to hold a hunt for beginners nearer to town so that it is easily accessible for all."
The South Canterbury Hunt Club was founded in 1882, according to the club's web page and has 35 harrier hounds it uses to hunt.
