Livestock carrier, Brahman Express docked at PrimePort Timaru on Friday.
Claims a livestock vessel built to carry 4000 head of cattle has covertly docked in Timaru have been rubbished by port authorities.
Livestock carrier Brahman Express berthed at Timaru's port on Thursday night and was not listed on PrimePort Timaru's shipping schedule. This led to animal rights organisation Safe issuing a statement alleging the "secret entry of the China-bound vessel into South Canterbury was made to avoid detection".
PrimePort Timaru chief executive Phil Melhopt confirmed a livestock ship had docked in the harbour on Thursday night, and said there was nothing secretive about the ship's berthing.
PrimePort chief executive Phil Melhopt says there's nothing secretive about the Brahmin Express's berthing in Timaru.
"There's nothing unusual or covert about this, it's in plain view. It's not unusual cargo to be transported out of Timaru.
"It's all MPI (Ministry for Primary Industries) sanctioned. There's nothing cloak and dagger about it."
An aerial view Timaru's port with Livestock Carrier, Brahman Express docked at a wharf.
Melhopt said it was up to the port's clients to decide if they wanted their ships listed on the shipping schedule.
"If our customers don't want their movements to be on a shipping website it's entirely their call, and that's something we'll respect.
"But once it's in the harbour, it's very clear what it is."
Safe media manager Will Appelbe said not having a vessel listed on a port's website was only a recent development and provoked suspicion.
"Up until very recently pretty much all live export ships would appear on these websites - both on the Napier port and Timaru.
"I will call into question the reasons why they will not have their ship listed on the website. To us, between not having their ship listed on the website and the MPI making it very difficult for us to acquire information about these shipments, from our perspective it is very secretive."
MPI director of animal health and welfare, Dr Chris Rodwell, said there were no animals on board the vessel on Friday.
"Loading will start once all of the pre-checks have been completed.  We can't provide a timeframe for loading at this stage as it'll depend when all of the pre-checks have been done.
"The vessel must have adequate feedstock and water on board to last the expected duration of the journey plus additional reserves. The vessel must also have adequate space and surfaces for stock to move about, lie down and get up without injury."
He said the animal welfare export certificate (AWEC) would only be issued once all conditions, including the MPI's strict animal welfare requirements, had been met and all final checks had been completed by the ministry's vets.
Rodwell said if the AWEC is issued there would be experienced stock handlers and a vet present for the voyage.
The MPI strengthened requirements for the transport of stock earlier this year which will ensure we receive a 30-day post-arrival report in addition to a voyage report, he said.
Shipping company Livestock Express, which operates the Brahman Express has been contacted for comment.
