Livestock vessel the Queen Hind overturned carrying 14,600 sheep off the coast of Romania. Photograph: Animals International
The consolidation of the slaughterhouse industry has led to additional problems. The US, UK and France have all recorded fewer, larger meat plants, meaning animals must travel longer distances, and even into other countries, for processing. There is no cross-Europe data, but industry insiders say the trend is similar.
The World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) is the agency responsible for setting standards on public and animal health, and has a role in creating rules for animal welfare. But it is not responsible for ensuring that these rules are adhered to or for punishing anyone who transgresses – that is still down to individual governments.
Dr Matthew Stone, a deputy director-general of the World Organisation for Animal Health, said the group worked with its members and partners to define international standards and strategies for animal welfare and develop the capacity of veterinary services to implement those standards. “Our members have not given us the mandate to enforce compliance with our international standards – that remains the sovereign responsibility of each member country,” he said.
“Our standards and strategies for animal welfare promote implementation of bilateral agreements for trade in live animals that address contingency arrangements during transport, such as mechanical failure or adverse weather events, and importantly in the context of international trade, contingencies for disease outbreaks or health events.
“In such circumstances, our standards describe the responsibility to care for the sick animals, and if unloading at the port of destination is in their best interests, to facilitate quarantine, investigation, and decisions on the fate of the consignment. Humane treatment of animals remains an important consideration throughout the entire journey.”
After a series of crises, the governments of New Zealand and Australia took action to restrict live exports from their countries and increase monitoring of animals in transit. But other countries apply different rules, and the oversight of the regulations that do exist is patchy.
The European Union has a set of regulations that cover live animal transport within the boundaries, and are supposed to cover them beyond. But although EU laws stipulate that exporters must be confident that standards will be met beyond the border, in practice this is difficult to ensure.
Peter Stevenson, chief policy adviser of campaign group Compassion in World Farming, said: “We’ve told the EU they should not be sending animals to places where this is happening.
“There are international laws on animal welfare at slaughter set by the World Organisation for Animal Health, and we should not be sending animals to places where we know they are being broken,” he said.
“Some of this is just habit. If the will was there for the EU to say – probably working with Australia – that there could be no more live exports, then it could be done.”
He said that the slaughterhouses he had seen in the Middle East were the worst he had seen.
Stevenson said: “The OIE should be doing much more to help its member countries to implement its standards on welfare during transport and slaughter. Many OIE member countries simply don’t know where to begin when it comes to implementing the OIE standards on welfare at slaughter.”
He said: “I don’t think a global body would really help with enforcement. We simply need the European Commission and other countries to enforce regulations rigorously.”
Reineke Hameleers, director of the lobbying group Eurogroup for Animals , said: “The EU needs to enforce the transport regulation until the destination in the third country. However, in practice this is very hard because the EU relies on working with many different third countries where no enforcement infrastructure is in place. Also, once the animals have arrived there is no way to ensure their welfare during transport and slaughter.”
“The existing legislation is not up to date, unenforceable and out of step with societal demands. There’s barely any legislation on transport by sea, and once the animals are outside the EU, there is no way of even monitoring standards, let alone enforcing them – and this goes for slaughter as well as transport.”
The group is calling for a total ban on live exports, and limits on journey times within countries.
