Looking for ideas for Xmas presents? Fresh stocks of Cattle Baron boardgame arriving soon
A fresh consignment of Beef Central’s popular ‘Cattle Baron’ board game is on the water, and will arrive in port in plenty of time for gift-giving for the 2019 Christmas season.
Now in its third print run, Cattle Baron has proven to be an enormous hit with people who have an interest in the Australian cattle industry, since it was launched at the Beef 2018 industry expo in Rockhampton in May last year.
Understandably, sales reach a peak heading into Christmas, so we urge readers to place orders early to avoid disappointment.
‘Cattle Baron’ puts players in charge of their own iconic Australian cattle station, developing their property’s pastures, watering points and fences, and investing in top bulls to improve and expand their herd.
But beware – just like the real cattle industry, potential setbacks like droughts, bushfires or cattle market swings could be waiting around every corner!
Along the way, learn how Australian cattle producers work in an environment of unpredictable seasons and volatile markets to sustainably improve their land and their cattle to produce premium quality, clean-and-green Australian beef for customers around the world.
Here’s a link to a short Youtube video clip about the Cattle Baron board game:
Reader response to the Cattle Baron game since its May launch has been tremendous. Here’s a sample of their comments:
“Our kids have really enjoyed the Cattle Barron game we bought at Beef in Rocky. I’d like to purchase a couple more for Christmas presents, so please let us know when the next ones are available” – Margaret King.
“After a long rough year, this game will be the perfect thing to get all the family together to play and have fun with over Chriatmas” – Roz Gardner.
Samantha Mort, from Franklyn Vale near Grandchester in Queensland’s southeast, has now bought three copies of the game since Beef 2018.
“Every time friends come over and we play the game, they like it so much they take our copy home – so we have to keep re-ordering a replacement,” Samantha said.
“Best board game ever!” was the verdict of Brisbane reader Brendan Tatt, after he and his sons gave the game a spin after their boardgame purchase.
Cattle Baron is a game the whole family – from weaners to cull bulls and cows – will enjoy.
The game is not available through retail stores, but is purchased exclusively through Beef Central.
For purchasers in remote parts of the country, we advise placing orders by December 5, in order to make Christmas delivery.
