Insufficient immunity is increasing cases of lungworm in cattle, and this season is providing the perfect conditions for autumn outbreaks of disease, according to vet Claire Whittle.
Lungworm disease, also known as husk or hoose, is a serious respiratory disease which results in long-term losses in cattle productivity.
In adult dairy cows, milk yield can be reduced, impacting herd profitability by about £3/cow/day (2).
Cattle which either fail to develop immunity to lungworm as young animals, or which do not receive an annual immunity boost as adults, are at high risk of developing disease.
According to Claire Whittle, veterinary surgeon at LLM Farm Vets, this year is developing into a prime candidate for high levels of lungworm disease in late summer and autumn, and she is urging farmers to prepare to act fast to control disease outbreaks.
Claire, who covers livestock farms in Shropshire and the surrounding areas, says: “We are seeing changes in seasonality of lungworm disease, with outbreaks coming earlier and later in the grazing season than we used to expect.
“Typically, these can now occur from July onwards, but last year was particularly bad and we even had a case in May.” Lungworm infectivity is driven by the weather, with warm and wet conditions increasing the likelihood for infection.
The timing of turnout in spring and the climatic conditions during the grazing season have an impact on the ability of lungworm larvae to reproduce and infect cattle.
Claire says: “Lungworm larvae on pasture do not survive for long when it is hot and dry.
This year, the mainly dry spring conditions have kept challenge levels low.
“However, this means adult cattle have not received an annual boost to their existing immunity, and calves and youngstock are not receiving any early season challenge to help them build immunity.
“Rainstorms after this dry period will allow lungworm larvae to be released from dungpats and rapidly infect the pasture.
A fine balance needs to be struck between allowing cattle some exposure to lungworm at grass to build or boost immunity, while preventing high challenge situations which will result in disease.
Claire says: “Vaccination before turnout provides rapid onset immunity.
It is a good option, especially for young cattle during their first year at grass, and for all cattle on farms with a known lungworm population.” Alternatively, allowing cattle to receive a low dose challenge during each grazing season allows them to build long-lasting immunity to lungworm.
However, this needs careful management to ensure increasing challenge does not result in clinical disease.
Claire says: “Assess the risk to groups of animals based on their grazing history and any worm treatments given over the past and current season.
“If cattle have not had sufficient exposure to lungworm over the early grazing period, the risk of disease will remain high, potentially until housing time in areas with milder weather.” She warns that loss of immunity could be a particular problem this year.
“The unpredictable nature of lungworm means sudden high challenge late in the year can overwhelm any immunity gained early in the season, even from vaccination.
“Weaned suckler calves and dairy heifers require particular attention, since even if they acquired some immunity at grass the previous season, this wanes during housing.
“They are effectively naive again at turnout, and this year’s dry spring with limited exposure will compound the problem.”
