Minister Giriraj Singh said that the scheme envisages vaccination coverage to 300 million bovines.
The drive is aimed at controlling livestock diseases, especially foot and mouth disease (FMD) and brucellosis, in the next five years.
New Delhi: The Prime Minsiter Narendra Modi is scheduled to launch the Rs 13,343 crore livestock vaccination scheme on September 11 from Mathura. The drive is aimed at controlling livestock diseases, especially foot and mouth disease (FMD) and brucellosis, in the next five years.
Animal husbandry and fisheries minister Giriraj Singh said that the scheme envisages vaccination coverage to 300 million bovines (cows-bulls and buffaloes) and 200 million sheep/goat and 10 million pigs. A decision in this regard was taken in the first cabinet meeting of Modi 2.0 government.
“We aim to eradicate FMD and brucellosis diseases fully as it has done in the case of polio and tuberculosis in human beings. If a cow or buffalo gets infected with FMD, the milk loss is up to 100 per cent which could last for four to six months, he said.
In case of Brucellosis, he said that the milk output reduces by 30 per cent during the entire life cycle of animal and also causes infertility among the animals.
“The infection of brucellosis can also be transmitted to the farm workers and livestock owners. Both the diseases have a direct negative impact on the trade of milk and other livestock products,” said minister of state for animal husbandry Sanjeev Balyan, who is also a qualified veterinary doctor.
He said that due to FMD itself, country loses revenue of around Rs 18000-20,000 crore every year.
“The milk production goes down and countries importing meat also decline any shipment from India asking for meat from FMD free bovines. The eradication of these disease will directly increase earnings of farmers,” he said.
The government is serious in controlling this disease, whose eradication may help in doubling of farmers income.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
