Farmers moving cattle and other livestock over long distances will soon have to give the animals more frequent breaks for water, food and rest
Farmers moving cattle and other livestock over long distances will soon have to give the animals more frequent breaks for water, food and rest.
On February 20, new laws come into effect that decrease the length of uninterrupted trips from 48 hours to 36 hours for mature cattle, and 12 hours for juveniles. For horses and pigs, the limit is 28 hours. See more specific regulations on the Canadian Food Inspection Agency website .
"The biggest thing with Canada is it's a big country with vast land, and travel times can be quite long," says Larry Weatherby, chair of the Cattle Producers of Nova Scotia.
Weatherby, who has been a cattle farmer for over 35 years, tells NEWS 95.7 that the current rules haven't been updated since 1977.
"Nobody likes leaving rules too long, so they should've likely been looked at a few years ago," he says. "Nobody wants change, but for welfare of cattle yeah, it was time."
The new rules come from the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, but the organization has granted a two-year grace period for farmers to transition.
Weatherby says long trips are the norm in the industry, with breeding stock coming to the Maritimes from out West, and beef and veal being shipped to Ontario from the East coast for processing.
"Travel times include all the time that the animals are on the truck," he says. "So, if the truck driver has to stop to rest or sleep, the time that the truck is not moving is still considered as travel time."
Other factors like weather and waiting for ferries can add into the travel time too.
"If the trucker has to get off the road for snow, the travel time for the livestock is still being measured on the clock," Weatherby adds. "Local livestock going to and from Newfoundland have to go on the ferry and wait on the dock, and the ferry trip itself is considered in there as travel time."
Currently, the farmer says there's no rest stops in Atlantic Canada that farmers can use. The designated rest time for cattle is also increasing from five to eight hours.
"I know in Northern parts of Ontario there is rest stops. But here's nothing East of Ontario that I know of," Weatherby explains.
But within the Maritimes, Weatherby says mature cattle shouldn't face those long trips. It's only when travelling out of province that it becomes an issue.
"A lot of the feeder cattle go to Quebec," he says. "There's a kill plant in PEI, that's the only federally inspected beef plant in the Maritimes. But once you're into Quebec and Ontario, they finish a lot of cattle up there, cause that's where the grain is."
Although he doesn't sell any veal calves himself, Weatherby also says it may prove an issue that calves under eight to 10 days old won't be allowed to be transported.
"A lot of the dairy guys don't have the infrastructure set up to keep their calves. They've always got rid of them at two to five days and then they've moved on. So now it's falling back on them that they're going to have to keep their calves a little bit longer in order to transport them," he explains.
But Weatherby also says that with more frequent unloading of cattle at rest stops, there's more of a chance they will get injured.
"When the cattle are on the truck isn't the problem, it's the loading and unloading. So sometimes these rest periods aren't always the best thing," says the cattle farmer.
For those who don't follow the rules, Weatherby says there will be penalties in place. But most will just get a warning.
"There's a lot of different penalties. The first, they start with warnings and they just keep increasing. In most cases, they'll work with them," he says.
For trucking companies, there may be added cost in sending two drivers on the truck, so it doesn't have to stop for overnight breaks. Weatherby says they may pass this cost along to farmers.
"They're going to have to run two drivers on the truck, that's the only problem," he adds. " When you look at it that way it could put the trucking up a little bit."
For Nova Scotian farmers, Weatherby says the CFIA will hold workshops later this month to educate people about the new regulations.
"February 26 and 27, at Berwick Fire Hall, and in Truro, and Mabou, and Antigonish, and that's open to all farmers," he says. "So, we've been working with them but there is workshops coming up and I'm hoping that farmers will get out to them."
But he thinks farmers have their cattle and livestock's safety in mind. After all, it's their business at risk.
"Transporting livestock is a complicated process and there are many factors that are considered with animal welfare always the primary concern for everyone involved," Weatherby adds.
Victoria is HalifaxToday.ca's weekend editor and a Halifax-based freelancer. She is originally from Nova Scotia's Annapolis Valley.
