You have run out of free articles. You can support our newsroom by joining at our lowest rate!
A semitrailer carrying a load of cattle overturned late Thursday as the driver was trying to exit westbound Interstate 80 and merge onto Interstate 280. About 20 to 25 head of cattle were roaming the medians early Friday, causing authorities to shut down all lanes of Interstate 80 and westbound I-280 at Kimberly Road. There were no reported injuries.
A Scott County Sheriff's deputy helps keep cattle in the median along Interstate-280 early Friday. About 20-25 head of cattle were loose after the semitrailer in which they were being transported overturned at I-80 and I-280 shortly after 11 p.m. Thursday.
Some cattle died when a truck pulling a cattle trailer overturned on Interstate 80 late Thursday.
A Davenport Police media spokesperson did not say how many, as it was unclear how many cattle were in the load.
Portions of Interstate 80 and Interstate 280 were shut down for more than two hours early Friday morning as authorities attempted to herd 20 to 25 cattle roaming the medians after the truck overturned late Thursday.
It took 12 hours to round up the escaped cattle that could be found.
Davenport police, Scott County Sheriff's deputies, Iowa State Patrol — as well as the Davenport, Blue Grass and Durant fire departments — worked to keep the cattle off the roadway.
Police said the crash occurred at 11:05 p.m. Thursday as a semi with a load of cattle overturned on the north side embankment when the driver attempted to exit westbound I-80 onto southbound I-280.
The driver was not injured in the accident.
Around 12:40 a.m. Friday, westbound Interstate 280 was shut down at the Kimberly Road exit, while both lanes of I-80 were shut down.
Authorities said passing vehicles continued to spook the cattle, which caused the animals to continue moving along the medians instead of staying where they had been herded.
Police and sheriff's deputies used their vehicles along the shoulders of the roadway to keep cattle in the medians.
Tom Loewy contributed to this story.
