Here are audio highlights from around the ag industry, courtesy of Pro Farmer.
Good Morning farm country. Davis Michaelsen here with your morning update for Monday June 29. From Pro Farmer’s First Thing Today, these are some of the stories we are watching this morning:
Corn futures opened under pressure, but futures have since worked their way into positive territory, with most contracts currently up 3 cents. Soybean have also moved well off their lows to trade mixed. SRW wheat futures are up 2 to 3 cents, while HRW and HRS wheat futures are narrowly mixed. The U.S. dollar index is under pressure and crude oil futures are slightly higher. U.S. stock indexes are pointed toward mixed openings as Covid-19 continues to spread in many countries. Weekend news headlines highlighted that the pandemic’s global death toll now tops 500,000 and the total number of reported cases tops 10 million. This has squelched hopes for a robust economic recovery.
The National Weather Service outlook for July 4-8 is hot across the Midwest and Plains, with a band of dry weather stretching across the bulk of the Corn Belt. Exceptions include the Dakotas where there are elevated odds for wet weather.
USDA’s Acreage and Grain Stocks Reports on Tuesday and a big jobs report on Thursday will be the focus. Statistics Canada will also update its acreage forecasts today. Friday brings the U.S. Independence Day holiday. Markets are closed, along with government offices.
Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Alex Azar warned that the U.S. is running out of time to combat the spread of the coronavirus as the country sees cases spiking in some regions. On Sunday, Azar credited the progress made in two months since lockdowns began to protect the public from the virus but expressed concern about increased hospitalizations related to the illness, particularly as cases surge in the South.
China has been pushing U.S. food and feed exporters to sign declarations guaranteeing shipments are free of coronavirus. Instead, the U.S. is signing letters assuring the safety of their cargoes, according to the Agriculture Transportation Coalition. The statements assure importers that shipments have been harvested, processed, and handled consistent with industry safety standards and guidelines from medical experts.
China plans to impose visa restrictions on US officials over Hong Kong. The move is in retaliation for Washington’s decision last week to restrict visas for Chinese officials who undermine Hong Kong’s semi-autonomous status. The Wall Street Journal on Friday reported China has told Washington that “meddling’” in Hong Kong, Taiwan and other matters could jeopardize Chinese goods purchases under the Phase 1 trade deal.
The ARC/PLC signup deadline for the 2020 crop year is tomorrow, June 30. Although program elections for the 2020 crop year remain the same as elections made for 2019, all producers need to sign a 2020 enrollment contract.
Live cattle futures stabilized over the past week, raising the possibility futures could strengthen amid improving beef demand this week. Last week’s Quarterly Hogs & Pigs Report weighed heavily on the lean hog market the latter half of the week, as it showed kills will run 12% to 13% above year-ago levels through July.
Get more daily market reports from Pro Farmer, start a free trial here
