Since 2011, Tunisia's dairy sector has suffered a dwindling of cattle herds because of indiscriminate slaughter and smuggling.
Big challenges. A herdswoman walks her herd of cows and sheep in the northern Tunisian countryside of Mateur. (AFP)
TUNIS - Problems in Tunisia’s dairy industry have resurfaced as authorities, especially in the Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries, are yet to find solution to the issue.
Dairy farmers meet periodically at the regional level to plan activities to try to convince the government to aid in the development of the sector, which has become burdensome for the state because of mishandling of resources and mismanagement.
Since the January 2011 Tunisian uprising, the dairy sector has suffered a dwindling of cattle herds because of indiscriminate slaughter and smuggling. There is a shortage of milk in Tunisian markets and Tunisians blame the suppliers and distributors, who are suspected of withholding milk from the market until prices rise.
Mnaouar Sghiri, a member of the Tunisian Union of Agriculture and Fisheries, said the organisation predicted a serious drop in milk production and the government’s inaction to remedy the situation.
Sghiri said, milk production in October dropped to about 30 million litres per day, while the strategic milk stock, at 17 million litres, was barely sufficient to supply the market for two-and-a-half months.
Official estimates state that daily milk consumption in Tunisia’s domestic market stands at about 1.5 million litres per day, in a period characterised by a shortage of production because of climate change, which may further complicate the problem. With dairy production falling, there is a market shortfall of 400,000 litres.
The outbreak of cattle disease is reducing the number of cattle, causing a drop in production and significant losses for farmers. The government earlier reached an agreement with the agricultural union that stipulated a charter to support the dairy sector through a flexible pricing system that would consider production costs and shift prices when necessary.
The agreement also provides for a programme to increase herds but the government has yet to implement it.
Dairy farmers are particularly anxious about keeping a certain profit margin to cover increasing fodder and veterinarian prices. They also blame the drop in the value of the dinar against major currencies for increased costs of imported packaging supplies. Two years ago, at the peak of the crisis of the dairy sector, losses were estimated at $65 per 1,000 litres of milk.
Observers said agricultural sector conditions have led to a shortage of workers in livestock raising and the exacerbation of urban migration. Migration to cities creates an additional burden for the state. Many dairy farmers, however, have moved to urban areas after failing to see improvements in the sector.
Rural areas in Tunisia have been marginalised since the government has not implemented reform programmes in those regions, despite officials’ promises.
Sghiri said authorities' approach to dairy and agriculture problems was limited to calculations of costs and profits, even though rural areas are economic and social safety valves.
Economists have warned for years of the potential collapse of the sector. Not only does the sector play a vital role in the country’s economy, it is vital to the daily diet of Tunisians.
The farmers’ union threatened on several occasions to stop milk production when negotiations with the government failed. The government struck back by importing milk amid rising public discontent. The government has been criticised for worsening the trade deficit because of the imports.
Sana Adouni is a Tunisian journalist.
