The Canadian Cattlemen’s Association says the beef industry is facing revenue losses that could reach upwards of $500 million by the end of June, depending on how far market prices decline. Fed cattle prices have already hit their lowest point since October 2013, according to market analysis service Canfax, and there is great uncertainty about how long it will be before processing plants return to full capacity. (The Cargill plant is currently temporarily idled, while the JBS plant at Brooks is down to just one shift.)
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
“With these numbers, it doesn’t take long before it becomes a real wreck,” Lowe said. “So this is urgent. This isn’t something we can wait on for three weeks or a month more.”
The association is calling on the federal government to implement a “set-aside” program, similar to one that was used during the 2003 BSE crisis, that would compensate producers for keeping animals on feed for longer — thus stabilizing supply and demand and preventing prices from bottoming out.
“It stops a market collapse,” Lowe said. “It’s not going to guarantee anyone a profit, but it stops a market collapse.”
Cattle feed at the bunk at Thorlakson Feedyards near Airdrie. The bottleneck at packing plants affected by COVID-19 has meant more expenses down the line for ranchers and feedlots. Jim Wells/Postmedia
A set-aside program, to be used for at least the next few months, would be “very appropriate,” said Ben Thorlakson, owner of Thorlakson Feedyards near Airdrie.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Thorlakson added that many Alberta feedlots also typically export a portion of their cattle to the U.S., but COVID-19 outbreaks in meat plants south of the border have virtually eliminated that market as well.
“The plants we would generally sell to in the western U.S., like Tyson in Washington and JBS in Utah and the plants in Colorado, they’re scrambling to kill cattle from feeders in their own area,” he said. “I don’t believe they’re killing any Canadian cattle right now.”
At Kasko Cattle near Coaldale, 50 loads of cattle that were to be shipped to slaughter in the last two weeks have not gone anywhere.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
“As we hold them back, they get too heavy and it’s expensive to feed them at that point,” said owner Ryan Kasko, adding his own profits have already been affected by slaughterhouse slowdowns.
“When Cargill announced last week it was shutting down, the prices dropped immediately around $500 a head,” Kasko said. “Feedlots typically work on a $20-$30 a head profit margin, so if we face a $500 loss in a week, it’s devastating.”
