Australia's farmers are fighting back from bushfires and drought with new ideas around regenerative agriculture and a determination to stay on the land.
The New South Wales Northern Tablelands has felt both extremes in recent months, but now producers are breathing a collective sigh of relief after recent heavy rain, even if it brought the discomfort of some short-term flooding.
The transformation of paddocks from brown to green in a matter of weeks has been a saving grace for Wilmot Station at Ebor, about 80 kilometres east of Armidale, which can now begin the restocking process thanks to years of regenerative farming practices.
Experts expect the trend to catch on after recent rain so rapidly reversed the devastation by drought and bushfire.
Wilmot Station manager Stuart Wilmot is moving aggressively back into the market.
Wilmot Station is one of three properties that make up the Wilmot Cattle Company and, like every other property, it has been affected by the drought.
Added to this, the 1800-hectare station was badly hit in September by a bushfire that started in bordering Guy Fawkes National Park.
Two and a half thousand hectares of pasture was destroyed, although there were no stock losses and no major buildings destroyed.
In all of this, manager Stuart Austin's faith in regenerative farming and managing the place holistically has not wavered.
"It's started to put resilience in the landscape," he said.
"We have seen some extraordinary gains in soil carbon. The way the country is responding to rainfall we are seeing the benefits of what we are doing," he said.
"It has been the driest it's ever been here in the lead up to the fire.
"The turnaround has been extraordinary. We had around five inches of rain between September and December which started to put bit of a pick back in the place," Mr Austin said.
"A green tinge and then around mid-January it started raining and basically it hasn't stopped. The remarkable thing is the turnaround which has been extraordinary."
Jim Gerrish, who runs beef cattle in central Idaho in the United States and travels the globe providing advice on grazing lands, was invited to Wilmot to discuss regenerative farming.
"Ranching needs to be done in harmony with nature rather than ranching against nature," Mr Gerrish said.
As well as farming for about 30 years, Mr Gerrish has also worked with the University of Missouri.
"Rather than buying in more and more inputs to push production up, you may not have been increasing the profit margin at all," he said.
Mr Gerrish said working with nature meant adapting to ecosystem processes like "the solar energy flow, water cycle, mineral cycle, bio-diversity responses. If you focus on managing those processes it really changes the profit potential of ranching".
Idaho beef producer and grazing educator Jim Gerrish talks to farmers.
The Wilmot Cattle Company, stretching over three properties totalling just under 6,000 hectares, would normally carry about 5,000 head of cattle in spring.
While its average annual rainfall is just over 1,200 millimetres, last year was just a third of that and, by December, the company had reduced its herd to 240, all at the Ebor property.
"We can't control the rainfall," Mr Austin said.
He said his team's focus was on an acceptance that "it is not going to rain, rather than it is".
"Our biggest goal is to keep our land in good condition, leave our grass plants in a good state such that, when it rains, the response is rapid," he said.
"We haven't spent any money on feed or inputs. We just kept putting that cash in the bank and leaving it there and paying our bills month to month and knowing, when the time came, we'd have cash available and that's the position we are in now."
With pastures responding to rain, having that cash available has enabled Wilmot to rebuild.
"We've certainly been in the market aggressively and bought a lot of cattle a lot earlier than what a lot of others have been able to do," Mr Austin said.
Rachel Ward is making a documentary on farming.
With the rebuilding of infrastructure and fences underway at Wilmot, the company hosted a field day on regenerative farming that drew about 400 people to hear from Mr Gerrish and other acclaimed speakers.
Among them was actor and director Rachel Ward, attending as both a primary producer and a film maker.
Known for her performances in movies including Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid and The Thornbirds, she and husband and fellow actor Bryan Brown have run beef cattle in the Nambucca area for 30 years.
"There is really no going back," Ms Ward said.
"It's a game changer as far as climate goes, as well. It's a fantastic world I have suddenly found myself moving in.
"Obviously, we have been entrenched in industrial farming for a very long time.
We've been using pesticides and fertiliser for a long time. The idea of farming without it is very challenging. It certainly was to me."
Ms Ward argues regenerative farming also leads to more balanced lifestyles for her workers.
"I know with my farm managers there is so much time spent spraying and killing, mulching and god knows what else. They were on the land from seven till eight at night. Today you are letting mother nature do the work for you," she said.
"You let the cattle out and do the work for you. Move them around. I am not suggesting you move the cattle around in the morning and put your feet up. You are not fighting mother nature, you are working with her."
One primary producer who travelled from Bombala in the south of New South Wales to observe and speak was Charlie Maslin, who runs merino sheep and Angus cattle on 5,000 hectares and is heavily involved with Soils for Life.
The non-profit organisation promotes a unified approach regenerative to soil management by farmers, scientists, consumers and governments.
Mr Maslin farms in an area hit by drought and while he was not directly affected by bushfires, they came close.
Like many, he has de-stocked, halving his sheep numbers and reducing his cattle herd by a quarter.
He says regenerative farming has certainly been a benefit.
Our best stories in your inbox?
"Labour needed for stock work is down by around 40 per cent," he said.
"Sure, in the higher stocking years when we have a lot of feed maybe we are a bit behind because we are not pushing the land as hard," he said.
Recent rain brought a smile to his face and having good cover meant very little top soil washed away.
The ground cover meant much of the soil that has been swept along with the floodwaters from elsewhere has been captured by his pastures, providing further nourishment.
"We really adjust our numbers to suit the conditions," he said.
"At the moment our numbers are down to around 30-to-40 percent to what we had two years ago, so we have adjusted the amount of mouths we have got to suit the feed availability.
