James Mickleboro | July 2, 2020 7:00am | More on: BWP RFF
Fortunately, in this low interest rate environment, there are a good number of dividend shares offering investors generous yields.
Two dividend shares that I would buy right now instead of a term deposit are listed below. Here’s why I think they are great income options:
As the largest owner of Bunnings Warehouse sites in Australia with 68 leases, I believe BWP could be a property trust to buy. This is because I believe that Bunnings is one of the highest quality businesses in the country and well-positioned to continue its growth through the pandemic and over the coming years. Especially given how the government is supporting the construction industry with renovation grants.
I believe this should make it easier for BWP to collect rent as normal at a time when other retail property companies are struggling to do so. Based on the current BWP share price, I estimate that the company’s shares offer investors a 4.8% FY 2021 dividend yield.
Another property company which I think would be a great option for income investors is Rural Funds. It has a focus on agricultural properties and owns a diverse range of assets across several different industries. These include cattle, vineyards, and orchards. Due to the nature of these industries, its tenants generally sign long term leases. And as these leases tend to contain fixed rental increases, the company has great visibility with its future earnings and distributions.
As a result, it has already provided its guidance for FY 2021. Next year Rural Funds intends to increase its distribution to 11.28 cents per share. This works out to be a forward 5.6% distribution yield based on the current Rural Funds share price. Overall, I think this makes Rural Funds a great dividend share to own in the current environment.
When investing expert Scott Phillips has a stock tip, it can pay to listen. After all, the flagship Motley Fool Share Advisor newsletter he has run for more than eight years has provided thousands of paying members with stock picks that have doubled, tripled or even more.*
Scott just revealed what he believes are the five best ASX stocks for investors to buy right now. These stocks are trading at dirt-cheap prices and Scott thinks they are great buys right now.
Motley Fool contributor James Mickleboro has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool Australia owns shares of and has recommended RURALFUNDS STAPLED. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy . This article contains general investment advice only (under AFSL 400691). Authorised by Scott Phillips.
