The estimated buying zones of 128 slaughterhouses were combined with locations of forest fire alerts.
Fires were three times more common in beef-producing zones than in the rest of the Amazon this summer, according to a new analysis.
The findings once again draw attention to the links between Brazil’s powerful beef industry and the deforestation of the Amazon rainforest, just as the world debates climate change at COP25 .
Responding to the work by the Guardian and the Bureau of Investigative Journalism (BIJ), MEPs called on the EU to block beef which may be linked to deforestation. “It is absolutely urgent that the EU puts in place a legal duty on European companies to ensure that their supply chains are free of deforestation,” said Heidi Hautala, a Finnish MEP.
Two years ago Brazilian NGO Imazon collected data to estimate the beef buying zones throughout the Amazon. They identified 128 slaughterhouses, and set about establishing the areas from which these plants could feasibly buy their cattle for processing. Through phone interviews with staff at the abattoirs, or by taking averages based on methods at other meat plants, the research team gathered information on the maximum distances from which each would likely source cattle.
They modelled this data against local factors such as roads, navigable rivers and weather patterns, and estimated the maximum potential buying zone for each slaughterhouse. The buying zones cover large areas of hundreds of km, and there is significant overlap between the buying zones for different companies. Added together, the data creates a compelling picture of the areas of the Amazon where cattle is being raised for beef.
The climate crisis is the most urgent threat of our time. Help us fight it | Katharine Viner
Using methods designed by the non-profit sustainability project Chain Reaction Research , the Guardian and the BIJ mapped Nasa fire alerts archive data on to the legally defined area of the Amazon and found that of the 554,000 alerts from July to September, nearly 376,000 – around 70% – were in the estimated buying zones, despite the fact that this area covers far less than half of the legal Amazon.
Some of the world’s biggest meat companies operate in the region. More than a quarter of a million fire alerts were issued in the estimated buying zones of JBS, the largest supplier of meat globally, for example. Its factories are known to export to Europe, including to UK companies.
There were almost 80,000 fire alerts in the probable buying areas of Marfrig, the third largest Brazilian beef exporter, and more than 66,000 around abattoirs owned by Minerva. These three meatpackers dominate in Brazil’s Amazon and account for nearly half of the cattle slaughtered in the region, according to Imazon.
