The livestock sector uses more than 80% of the world’s farmland, yet provides only 18% of global calories. Photograph: George Steinmetz/The Guardian
Animal products tend to have far higher environmental footprints – in some cases 10 to 100 times higher – than plant-based foods because of the amount of land, water, greenhouse gas-emitting fertilisers and energy needed to produce a portion of protein. The livestock sector uses more than 80% of the world’s farmland, either as pasture or as land producing animal feed, yet provides only 18% of global calories.
Last week in a landmark climate report the World Bank committed to working with clients to incentivise sustainable diets and “address drivers of increased meat consumption”, and said it was considering advocating for a carbon tax on the livestock sector. The report extolled the climate benefits of plant-based meat substitutes.
Jeremy Coller, head of investment firm Coller Capital and founder of responsible finance network Fairr, said that while the financial world was beginning to play its role in lowering greenhouse gases, it was “crazily disjointed and inconsistent for the IFC and EBRD to invest public funds in intensive animal agriculture, one of the world’s highest-emitting industries”.
Our analysis of public records and industry data highlights how the banks have financed companies operating across eastern Europe, Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Latin America. Some investments were in countries where meat supply is currently low, such as Ethiopia, but others were made in places where meat consumption per capita is already high or average, such as Ukraine, China and Romania.
The dairy sector was the biggest recipient of IFC and EBRD funding, with processing companies and farms receiving more than $1bn. The pig and poultry sectors each received about $500m.
The IFC told the Bureau that it is intentionally catering for growing global demand for meat and dairy and that the livestock sector is a key pillar of food security and poverty reduction in many countries. It acknowledged, however, that the sector had a “large environmental and climate footprint”.
The European Bank said the meat and dairy sectors represent an important staple in the diets of many people but that livestock projects represent about 1% of its total business investment. Both banks said they are working to reduce the emissions of the projects they fund.
The impact of each project should be considered against global and national emission budgets, according to Prof Tim Benton, director of the Energy, Environment and Resources programme at Chatham House.
But he warned that trying to reduce the carbon footprint of a pint of milk or a single chicken is pointless when demand for those products keeps increasing. “Just because the greenhouse gas efficiency of a unit of meat or dairy has improved, if everybody’s eating more of it, the total emissions that come from meat or dairy might increase.”
Both development banks told the Bureau that they assess individual projects for their carbon emissions. The EBRD added that it had introduced practices to assess climate risks across its entire portfolio.
