Rich Porter of the Reading-based Porter Cattle Company shared the history of his farm and answered questions about the operation during Saturday’s Prairie Talk at Pioneer Bluffs in Matfield Green.
Porter Cattle Company specializes in a cattle stocking niche — each year they receive around 7,000 high-risk calves, taking them from 350 to 850 pounds with a combination of grass and feed. Porter also farms around 2,600 acres of corn and soybeans.
Porter spoke about how his father, Walter Porter, founded Porter Cattle Company in the late 1950s, and his own roundabout path to following in his father’s footsteps. Both of his parents were teachers and his father farmed as well. The family had about 500 acres of land, separated by other land holdings. Porter Sr. wanted something larger and all in one parcel, so he began searching for about 1,000 acres on which to build a cattle operation.
Nothing he saw fit the bill until he found a 5,000-acre property near Reading that checked all the boxes — except for the size. Going from 500 acres to 5,000 acres “was a big step,” Porter said, “but his banker believed he could do it.”
The new Porter Cattle Company needed three good years to make the larger property work, “and they got it,” Porter said.
With the family business in good shape, the younger Porter began thinking about his own future.
“I grew up knowing I’d never farm,” he said, eliciting a laugh from the standing-room-only crowd in the historic Pioneer Bluffs barn. “I didn’t know what I’d do, but it wasn’t farming.”
Porter attended Kansas State University where he received a degree in chemical engineering, and then went on to earn a law degree. He was working for Bethlehem Steel in Pennsylvania when his parents visited and his father started asking him to come back to the farm.
“I remember my Dad asking about my salary and when I told him, he wasn’t impressed,” Porter said. “I told him that was a very good salary and he responded, ‘Any company that would pay you that amount of money won’t stay in business for long.’”
It was a prescient statement – Bethlehem Steel began struggling in the late 1970s and in 1979, Porter left Pennsylvania and returned to the family farm in Lyon County. His decision came just as agriculture’s roaring ‘70s ended and at the beginning of a severe depression in agriculture during the 1980s.
“Looking back, I think this was the best thing that could ever have happened to me because it forced me to find ways to do things efficiently,” Porter said. “It was really a terrific opportunity, though I didn’t think so at the time.”
Porter worked with his father for 25 years before taking over the family business completely. He credits successful business operations with strong values of loyalty and simple lessons he learned in life.
Porter cited a quote from J. Paul Getty that guides him: “Getty said there are three simple rules to success,” Porter said. “One, get up early. Two, work hard all day. Three, strike oil.” After the audience laughter died down, Porter continued, “At first I thought it was just a cute saying, but then I realized that it’s true. You have to get up early and work hard all day to strike oil. Doing the first two things increases the odds of striking oil, whatever that means to you.”
His philosophy for success relies heavily on long-term relationships with vendors and suppliers. Several long-time business partners were in the audience on Saturday and Porter introduced them to the crowd with comments about their history of working together.
“You have to make it work for both people,” he said of those relationships. “Don’t treat people great as if they’re your greatest resource, treat them great because they’re your greatest resource. But be willing to say ‘this isn’t working out.’ You have to constantly be looking for how we can both benefit.”
An ice cream social followed the Prairie Talk with floats and a sundae bar provided by Pioneer Bluffs volunteers for free will donations. Proceeds will fund future heritage programs at Pioneer Bluffs.
— For more information about Pioneer Bluffs and upcoming events at the historic ranch, visit pioneerbluffs.org .
