Holstein calves held in plastic pens, Barton, Preston, Lancashire. Photograph: FLPA/Alamy Stock Photo
Academic researchers say early separation within 24 hours has been found in some cases to reduce distress for both beef and dairy cows and calves, although the evidence for dairy calves is still inconclusive. “The faster you break the bond [between cow and calf] the fewer vocalisations you are going to get from calves,” says Marina Von Keyserlingk, a professor in animal welfare at the University of British Columbia.
Helen Browning, dairy farmer and CEO of the organic trade body the Soil Association, separates her calves and cows within 24 hours, but then keeps them with a surrogate mother cow who has been retired or rested from the dairy herd. Under organic standards , calves are separated from their mothers after birth, but are always kept in groups and must be given cow’s milk for their first 12 weeks.
“Calves hate being weaned and cows hate their calves being taken away, whether after one day or five months. But it is better to do it before a bond has developed. In nature cows would live together as a family with cows and their grandchildren and great-grandchildren, so we are already interfering a lot with that family process,” she says.
In terms of cow and calf health and welfare, farm vets say separation is not a priority. “If you really want to improve animal welfare then we should try to tackle lameness, calf mortality and ensuring the calf gets sufficient quantities of colostrum,” says Dr Kathryn Ellis, a farm animal vet at the University of Glasgow.
Browning says dairy farmers are looking to learn from what Finlay is doing, but that the industry still needs to think through what is best for the welfare of both calves and cows being kept to produce milk. “We should think about what issue we’re trying to resolve. Is it an emotive issue or a welfare issue? I think it is the former.”
Despite the scepticism, Von Keyserlingk estimates that more than 400 dairy farms are trialling calf at foot systems in Europe and Australia. Not far from Finlay’s farm in south-west Scotland, another dairy farmer keeping calves with their mothers has recently started selling his milk to consumers at £1.59 a pint.
“This could be the norm in 20-30 years, just as tie-stalls were in the past. But it’s a fundamental change for how farms operate so we need to help farmers figure out how to make it better for the health and welfare of cows and calves and at the same time practical for farmers,” says von Keyserlingk.
“To better support farmers in this transition, new research is needed on how these systems may be managed to function best for the cows and calves, including reducing the risk of currently common production diseases such as mastitis and lameness,” she adds.
