Dina Medina, a guinea pig breeder in Peru. Photograph: Lionel Vigil/World Neighbors
“I had my cow, it gave me good milk, [I made] cheese and sold its calves. Raising cattle took much more time, as the forage was far from my home, I had almost no time for my family or other activities. I did not value breeding cuy but, since I participated in the workshops, I have been motivated. It generates permanent income, people know I have cuy for sale, so visit me every week to buy,” said Llocclla, who is now hoping her daughter will join the business.
Materials needed for cages and sheds, constructed from adobe, a brick composite made of earth, water and straw or dung, can be sourced locally. Maintaining the health of cuy is vital; breeders avoid the need for antibiotics or agro-veterinary products by feeding them fresh food and water and regularly cleaning the animals and their sheds.
Research by Peru’s national health institute has shown that cuy has greater nutritional value than poultry, beef or lamb.
But of the 20 breeds of guinea pig that exist in Peru, only three are bred for meat. The other breeds are exported as pets. Cuy reared for pets weigh an average of 750g, while breeds reared for consumption, such as Andino and Inti, are a hefty 1,520g. The Peruvian breed has been known to weigh in at up to 3kg.
“It’s an animal that handles cold climates better than hot ones,” said Vigil. “I do not rule out their production in countries where they are considered pets, but there needs to be improvements in marketing and presentation. For example, they should be offered without the head and legs, so that in supermarkets it is viewed as organic healthy meat instead of a slaughtered pet.”
A 2019 report by Peru’s ministry of agriculture revealed a growing international demand for cuy meat, with an 18% growth in sales between 1994 and 2018. Prices have also increased from $5 to $13 per kilo over the same period. Peru remains the leading producer, followed by Ecuador, with Andean expats in the US the main export market (99%).
“Some Peruvian companies export bagged and frozen cuy to the US and Japan,” said Vigil.
“They have had serious problems trying to convince customs officials that their products are fit, healthy and do not represent any danger to public health. This is despite companies having met export and import standards in both countries and having permits issued by the US Department of Agriculture.”
