Units in agricultural property trust, Rural Funds Group fell heavily on Thursday, following the circulation of a Hong Kong-based report that accused its manager, Rural Funds Management, of running a Ponzi scheme.
The damning report, by advisory firm Bucephalus Research, followed Texas-based activist short-seller Bonitas Research's attack on Rural Funds Group and its manager Rural Funds Management a month before, which sent its units crashing 42 per cent.
The Bucephalus report has focused on Rural Funds acquisition of cattle properties.
RFF units fell more than 12 per cent on Thursday, closing at $1.71. They were trading at $2.35 before the first Bonitas report released on August 6.
In its report, Bucephalus said RFF units were worth $1.20 at best, while Bonitas said RFF units were "ultimately worthless".
RFM acknowledged the "critical" Bucephalus report in a statement to the Australian Securities Exchange on Wednesday.
While it said the document's criticisms were "substantially similar" to claims made by Bonitas (which RFM is now suing in the NSW Supreme Court ) it did not explicitly deny them.
Instead, it recommended investors rely on RFF's most recent full-year results and the Ernst & Young report that concluded the Bonitas allegations were not substantiated.
RFF floated on the ASX in 2014 at a unit price of $1 following the merger of unlisted RFM-managed funds.
Highly acquisitive in recent years, it now owns almost $1 billion worth of cattle stations, feedlots, almond and macadamia orchards, vineyards, poultry sheds, cotton farms and water rights.
However both Bucephalus and Bonitas believe these assets are overvalued, enabling RFM to collect higher fees.
RFM collected $8.5 million in management fees in the 2019 financial year, up from $6.3 million in the prior year.
Fees are calculated based on a management fee of 0.6 per cent a year of adjusted total assets, and an asset management fee of 0.45 per cent of adjusted total assets
Bucephalus managing director Robert Medd alleged RFM capitalises, rather than expensing costs within RFF assets,
"This means a) profits are higher than they should be, and b) asset values keep rising, which means higher fees for RFM," he told The Australian Financial Review.
In its report, Bucephalus homed in on RFF's acquisition of five feedlots and cropping land in July last year for $52.7 million in a sale-and-leaseback deal with cattle processor JBS Australia, a subsidiary of Brazil-listed pork and meat giant JBS.
Larry Schlesinger writes on real estate, specialising in commercial and residential property. Larry is based in our Melbourne newsroom. Connect with Larry on Twitter . Email Larry at larry.schlesinger@afr.com
