Friday is store sale day in Feilding.
Hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of sheep and cattle are traded in New Zealand's busiest saleyards every Friday.
Farmers from around Manawatū head into Feilding on sale day and the smell of livestock wafts towards the bustling town centre, just 50 metres from the stockyards.
Saleyard tour guide Eric Linklater says his wife overheard a cafe patron remark on the smell one particularly "high" day. "Oh we don't worry about that," the cafe worker said, "That's the smell of money."
On a quiet day there might be 3000 sheep sold but in March, April and May, numbers will peak above 25,000 and there will be more than 100 buyers.
There's a steady flow of cattle traded year round, with about 1500 passing through the yards on any given sale day.
Unlike other yards around the country, Feilding holds sales every week.
On Monday is the prime sale and on Fridays the bigger store sale is held. To make the prime sale stock has to be high quality and tends to be heavier weights.
Visitors from all over New Zealand and the world visit the sale yards.
The saleyards have been trading in the same spot since 1880. There are 350 sheep pens, 140 cattle pens and 45 deer pens covering 3.7 hectares.
Last year, auctioneers sold 9.27 million sheep and 87,774 cattle. The biggest day of the year was a Friday in April, when 25,248 sheep were sold.
Auctioneers move from pen to pen at a brisk pace, followed by a stream of farmers in navy and green. The sheep bleat loudly and the auctioneers shout over the roar of motorsport at nearby Manfield Stadium.
The Friday sale is a regular chance for farmers to catch up.
As he wades between woolly fat hoggets in one pen, an auctioneer says when he was checking them earlier he found six had cut teeth. This means they've graduated from hoggets to two-tooths.
The number of teeth in their mouths might affect their welcome at the freezing works but this lot haven't been drafted. "I didn't have any rattle," the auctioneer says. "Everyone happy?" Without pause for reaction, the sale begins.
Watch these stock agents auction sheep at Feilding Sale Yards.
The agents make 6 per cent of each pen sold but bigger buyers might negotiate for a lower percentage, Linklater says.
The pen of thirty sells for $227 each, $6810 for the lot. The stock changes hands at the slap of a notebook and transporting the animals is the buyer's responsibility.
There's a great deal of trust in the industry, Linklater says. He's been coming to sale day since his childhood.
Eric Linklater is part of a team of retired farmers who have been taking tours of Feilding Sale Yards since 2004.
His mother would collect him from school at midday and they would meet his father, who would always wear a tie to the sale, for lunch at the Denby Hotel, next door.
There are fewer neckties and children at the yards now but sale day is still a social event in Feilding.
Farmers can spend tens of thousands of dollars in a few minutes in the cattle auction arena.
Linklater is part of a team of retired farmers who give tours of the yards. People come to Feilding specially to experience the sales, Linklater says, and at least half of the visitors are foreign.
"It's amazing how many people have never put their hand on the wool of a sheep," he says.
One bidder, who buys a pen of 150 lambs for $162 a head, says he's done for the day, "nothing else good enough here," he says, laughing.
Watch Maurice Stewart auction cattle at Feilding Sale Yard.
He says he'll fatten the lambs up, they'll be "bloat control for cattle".
Auctioneer Maurice Stewart has just returned from three weeks' holiday and needs a cup of water before he can talk properly. "I've just lost my voice," he says, "I've been away so I'm not used to it."
Cattle are moved into the sale arena from holding pens.
At one of the auctions Stewart calls, cattle sell for $3.60 per kg live-weight, $1580 a head.
When they're killed, their weight will be roughly halved, Linklater says. That weight will be almost halved again, once the meat is boned out.
Stewart has been auctioneering for 20 years, his father worked for PGG Wrightson before him and his brother is a stock agent too.
Screens behind auctioneer Maurice Stewart show how many cattle are in a pen, their total and average weights, and their tuberculosis status, which is checked every year.
"It's been in the blood," he says. Stewart says farmers stick with agents they have a rapport with, and there aren't a lot of surprises on sale day.
"You should know who's going to buy the cattle today, if you've done your homework," he says. "You should know your values within 5 to 10 cents per kilogramme."
He travels as far away as Wairarapa, Taranaki, Taihape, Central Hawke's Bay and Taūpo to access stock before sale day.
Prices are good this year, Stewart says. "The sellers are happy, the buyers probably aren't as happy to see the pricing but they're getting it at the other end anyway."
Maurice Stewart will keep auctioneering till he's pushed off his mantle by an up-and-comer, he says.
Weather and biosecurity fears can impact stock numbers. Drought in Timaru five years ago resulted in 39,000 lambs being sold at Feilding, Linklater says.
Stewart says mycoplasma bovis has halted bull traffic from the South Island, buyers are "just a bit weary about it".
Stewart will be happy at the auctioneers' podium, "till I get pushed off the mantle by one of these young guys," he says.
The drovers brought sheep to the stockyards from the 1880s.
By 4.30, the last of the livestock have been loaded onto trucks and yards are being hosed down.
Linklater ends sale day in the same spot he begins his tours, under the drover's silhouette.
In the 1880s, it would take drovers four and a half days to move the two or three mobs of sheep from the surrounding districts to Feilding's yards.
The same journeys are now completed in a matter of hours, Linklater says. "The world has shrunk so much."
