Blackmount Organic farmer Tim Gow talk abut Tufty on their Mangapiri Downs station.
Southland organic farmer and stock breeder Tim Gow has spent 20 years perfecting a new breed of hairy highland cows fit for the modern age.
Highland cattle, originally from Scotland, were famed for their "Harley Davidson" handlebar shaped horns, but despite being a hardy and prized breed, horns were no longer welcome at vets, in transport trucks or even at the meat works, said Gow.
But with the help of his late uncle, Scott Dolling, a geneticist from South Australia, Gow has bred the horns out. Named and trademarked Tufty, these rare organic “polled” (de-horned) cattle were described on the website as “hardy, hairy, and happy”.
Gow has kept Highland Cattle since the 1980s, but also bred a type of Wiltshire sheep named and trademarked Shire.
Mangapariri Downs Organic Stud Farm in western Southland runs 4000 stock units and is set on 469 hectares, with 70 hectares devoted to forestry.
Tufty cattle were reared for meat, but they also made good pets, Gow said.
Tim Gow learned from his uncle, a breeding geneticist, about how breed highland cattle without horns.
Gow said he might consider exporting Tufty cattle at some stage. He had exported three highland cattle to Japan in the late 90s.
Tufty calves sold for $2200, while mated heifers and cows sold for $3800, and stud bulls $7000, all plus GST.
“For organic farmers, if you have to de-horn your cattle that’s no good because you have to use drugs. So we rapidly changed to the polled ones and it went just lucky enough with those few bulls that came along that made it happen,” he said.
His uncle gave him a handle on how to do it. For years, Gow kept cattle with stunted horns, until eventually he got one they called Hummer, because it was built like a hummer truck but had little mounds for horns that didn't grow.
He got a few more from female lines and was able to breed Tufty cattle. His daughter Melinda, now 20, named them after spending some time to get it just right, Gow said.
Born to a farming family in Southland, Gow went farming after returning from travels in his early 20s.
Blackmount Organic farmer Tim Gow with one of his Tufty cattle at Mangapariri Downs Station. The breeding had worked out quite well, he said.
He travelled through South East Asia, Afghanistan, Israel and other places where he encountered an ancient farming practice called sabbatical fallowing, which he eventually put into practice on his own farm in 1988.
It was “basically regenerative agriculture”, he said.
Although almost completely forgotten in New Zealand, the practice involved allowing one seventh of a farm's pasture to rest or lay fallow between early spring and winter when it was grazed. About 40 per cent of the standing hay was eaten and the rest went back into his soil as organic matter, Gow said.
"It's a form of fertilising and reseeding your farm, fixing up the soil".
Later, in 1989 he went organic, certified by Biogro.
“We looked at what kind of cattle would be good for organics, no one really knew back then. We managed to get some Scottish Highlands to try out. One of the oldest, hardiest breed of cattle,” he said.
The meat from highland cattle was highly prized for its marbling in some parts of Asia, and for many years Gow exported meat directly to the Park Hyatt hotel in Tokyo. Later he sold meat to the derby room at the Hong Kong Jockey Club when it was impossible to get from Scotland because of mad cow disease.
Tufty calves sell for $2200, while mated heifers and cows sell for $3800, and stud bulls $7000, plus GST.
However, the domestic market for organic meat became stronger and stock market crashes in Asia made it harder to export, so he returned to selling locally.
Now he only sold meat to friends and family.
He discovered that if he bred two brindle Tufties, he would end up with a skewbald patterned calf. These cattle were referred to as "Cupcakes" because his daughter Nikita, now 18, named the first one Cupcake when it was born on her birthday.
“They’re a very placid breed. With no horns they’re just laid back happy cattle,” he said.
Tufties, even when crossed with traditional horned highland cattle, would produce polled calves, he said.
Highland cattle were strong sellers because people loved the handlebar horns but sales of Tufties had been slower because people weren't aware of them. However, a recent video of a skewbald Tufty calf posted to Twitter had received over 9000 views.
He hadn't sold any skewbald Tufties yet, though.
