Bushfires on the New South Wales mid-north coast have had an impact on one man's attempts to develop a cattle breed renowned for its distinct markings.
Recent bushfires and drought however have stalled his efforts, forcing him to cut back his herd and reduce breeding
It also has slowed moves to widen the gene pool of the Canadian speckle park breed noted for its distinctive white, black and grey spots.
Added to this, plans to have the beef breed introduced to South Africa using the Australian-produced animal have slowed.
The Australian cattle market is dominated by Angus and Hereford, but this has not stopped South African-born Martin Luitingh from carrying the torch for the Canadian speckle park.
However when the fires ripped through his Big Wig speckle park stud near Taree, while no stock was lost, coupled with the drought, Mr Luitingh estimates the embryo program was set back three years.
"I think that all breeds are going to suffer," he said.
"Speckle park [will suffer] because the numbers are small, and they have been the fastest growing breed in Australia for the last five years — [it] will take a bigger knock percentage-wise.
"In order to project speckle park into the viable numbers, the breeding program must stay on track and full steam ahead.
"It won't be able to do that now," he said, standing near the small herd that he managed to keep on his 125-hectare property.
Like most livestock producers, the drought had forced Mr Luitingh to reduce his numbers.
A bank of speckle park cattle embryos has been built up by Martin Luitingh, as the drought has forced him to put the gathering of them on hold.
Some he moved to agistment in Victoria while another 30 to 40 per cent of the herd, which would normally be earmarked for his boutique meat business, was sold.
Then around 20 per cent of the purebred animals, which could have become optimum and would normally be treated as breeding stock that were not optimum, were also sold.
"Around 60 per cent of our normal stock have either gone to other places or sold," Mr Luitingh said.
"We kept the mothers and are hand feeding the cows which are carrying lactating calves. We have had to ensure they have the right nutrition to carry them through."
With Canada being the home of the distinctive marked cattle, Mr Luitingh maintains a small herd over there, although due to the drought and subsequent fire damage, he will not be drawing on their genes for a while.
"We did not want to be in the position where we were wasting expensive embryos on drought conditions, so we have cut back on our breeding program," he said.
Speckle park stud owner Martin Luitingh's embryo program is on hold due to drought.
Prior to the fires Mr Luitingh thought his property was still the best place to maintain his best breeders.
Although this did not seem such a good idea at the height of the blaze.
Our best stories in your inbox?
After ensuring the home was safe, he ringed some of the cattle with irrigation hoses.
"The bulls and the cows with small calves, were kept lightly sprayed — which they didn't mind," Mr Luitingh said.
On an adjacent property that he also owns there was not irrigation.
"On this property 270 degrees was surrounded by flames up to 30 metres in height," Mr Luitingh said.
"I spent the night with the cattle ensuring they didn't get spooked.
"Our fire plan, which included tilling the ground around them, meant the fire didn't jump."
Despite having to trim back his operation Mr Luitingh's enthusiasm to push the breed into his birth place has not diminished.
He has made numerous trips to South Africa meeting with authorities to gain permission to allow his speckle park embryos and semen to be exported to the rainbow nation.
"It's taken longer than we would have liked," Mr Luitingh said.
With the speckle park coming from the colder climes of Canada, "we need to mix it up with something that is used to drought conditions," he said.
"I've got 20 farmers champing at the bit," Mr Luitingh said.
"They are just waiting for government permission to start their programs. The sub-Sahara is a spectacular cattle haven.
