The Scots pines near Glenfeshie.
For decades, the way we farm has been degrading land and destroying wildlife. Now there’s a revolution coming – but is it going to create more problems than it solves? By Christopher de Bellaigue
The Scots pines near Glenfeshie.
In the last years of the 20th century, Glenfeshie, a 17,000-hectare estate in the Scottish Highlands, was in steep decline. Decades of overgrazing by deer had reduced its hillsides to clipped lifelessness. Denied the protection afforded by tree roots, the banks of the River Feshie were losing soil each time it flooded, the water depositing silt downstream. Those few Scots pines that had survived the browsing of the deer were nearing the end of their lives; soon there would be no seed source for the next generation.
Between 1997 and 2006, ownership of Glenfeshie passed between three Danish businessmen – and with it a self-destructive business model. Only by maintaining very high numbers of livestock could the flow of fee-paying deerstalkers armed with rifles be ensured, but because of the rising cost of gamekeepers and estate upkeep, Glenfeshie’s sporting operations were still making a loss. All the while, the pine martens, mountain hares and hen harriers for which the Highlands are a natural habitat were being crowded out by the deer on which the model depended.
In 2006, the billionaire Anders Holch Povlsen, the last and richest of the three Danes, whose fashion empire includes the online retail giant Asos, bought Glenfeshie. Urged on by his man on the ground, a former land agent called Thomas MacDonell, he intensified efforts that had started under his predecessor to bring down deer numbers, with a view to allowing the estate’s woodland to recover and biodiversity to return.
Glenfeshie is the biggest of the 12 Scottish estates that Povlsen and his wife Anne began acquiring and rewilding in 1996 – in the process spending a total of £70m and becoming the country’s largest private landowners . Although the term “rewilding” – meaning an approach to conservation that allows nature a free rein – has been in currency since 1990, many traditional landowners and gamekeepers continue to spurn both the term and the idea behind it. In the Highlands, rewilding implies that the concept of the country estate as a setting for people of quality to shoot game has had its time. Never very profitable – the Highlands were where rich people came to spend money they had made elsewhere – in recent decades, the sporting estates have become still less viable. As one veteran gamekeeper told me, very few of them actually make money.
Anne and Anders Holch Povlsen, owners of Glenfeshie. Photograph: Tariq Mikkel Khan/AFP
By 2013, MacDonell and his team had culled 8,000 deer at Glenfeshie, and his local opponents, among them a neighbouring deerstalking enterprise, had camped on the moral high ground. “When they shoot deer they call it sport,” MacDonell said wryly when I visited him last September, “and when we shoot deer they call it slaughter. Also, they claimed it would take hundreds of years for the woodland to regenerate.”
We were standing on a track overlooking the River Feshie. On either side, young Scots pines displayed bright green needles against the glowing heather. Among the pines grew rowans hung with scarlet berries, and bilberry bushes whose leaves would be fair game for white moth caterpillars in spring. There were more new trees on the far side of the Feshie, binding the banks and spreading up the hillside. MacDonell smiled. “As you can see, our opponents were wrong.”
Over the past 20 years or so, from South America to the Danube basin, ad hoc coalitions of politicians, activists and conscience-stricken billionaires (whose core activities, such as Povlsen’s clothing business, are often less than environmentally friendly), have rewilded millions of acres of mostly failed agricultural and grazing land. Their guiding philosophy – that we should leave the land alone – upends the long dominant view that land should be cleared, ploughed and wrung ever more efficiently for food.
Because many of the practitioners are billionaires, and because the landscapes they have returned to nature are (no matter who owns them on paper) our cherished inheritance, and because of a deeply held tradition of depending on the land for food, rewilding attracts controversy. But it is based on a longer view of the planet’s health, which dictates that we use the land not only to feed ourselves in a more environmentally sustainable way, but also to capture greenhouse gases, save endangered species and offer ourselves an occasional break from traffic and hand-sanitisers – that is, to leave town and enjoy the works of nature.
The regeneration of Glenfeshie is such a work. Across the hills that divide the Feshie’s catchment from that of the neighbouring river, the Tromie, MacDonell and his team have planted hundreds of thousands of pines, birches, willows and other native trees over the past decade. A few years from now, these stems will develop into a barrier against erosion, a carbon sink and a habitat for distinctive Highland birds such as the capercaillie and ptarmigan. Birds and the wind distribute seeds, while the estate’s deer, whose concentration has been brought down from 40 per sq km to one, are no longer numerous enough to eat all the young shoots. The increased vegetation also provides food for the pine martens, red squirrels and mountain hares that MacDonell is seeing in rising numbers, while the population of endangered birds such as crossbills and crested tits has also risen.
For whose benefit? The Povlsens’ Scottish operations currently make an annual loss of £3m, but it is hoped that they will turn a profit by 2027, thanks to clients paying to stay in luxurious accommodation, enjoy exquisitely underdone venison and wander the restored landscapes. When rewilding plans were first revealed, critics of Scotland’s concentrated land ownership – half of the Scottish countryside is owned by around 450 people – expressed fears that Glenfeshie might become a reservation for the rich, but these have been partially allayed by letting ordinary hikers walk across the glens for free.
If rewilding seems like a rich person’s indulgence, this is because its economic viability is unproven. It is also a misnomer, for whether by getting rid of tens of thousands of sheep in Patagonia or introducing a living species as a surrogate for an extinct one – Sayaguesa cattle in place of aurochs in Croatia’s Velebit Mountains, for instance – rewilding requires more human intervention than its name suggests. The tourism it offers is limited; a rewilded area cannot accommodate many people without undermining its own existence. By diverting investment towards repairing landscapes and contributing to the public weal, rewilders are taking money away from conventional economic activities. And this is where its impact will be felt in British farming. Barely a decade ago, the notion that land should be managed in order to ensure planetary wellbeing had few takers among farmers whose raison d’etre was to fill human bellies at the lowest possible cost. But this is the proposition that is now poised to determine the future of farming.
Farmers account for just 1.5% of the British population , but the size of their domain – 71% of the country’s surface area is classified as farmland – has given them power over the public imagination, reinforced by children’s books depicting resourceful hens and humorous porkers. Over time, this image of Britain – green, giving and blossomy, an Eden to which city-dwellers joyfully flee in moments of leisure – came to inform the country’s view of itself.
Memories of resilience in adversity were inevitably a factor in the growth of intensive farming. When the country was blockaded during the second world war and the nation’s farmers were told to convert scrub and pasture to sown fields, arable land doubled. In peacetime, the patriotic drive for self-sufficiency continued, as the population soared and farmers cleared more land in order to produce more food. Between 1946 and 1963, an average of 3,000 miles of hedgerows were stripped out each year.
After Britain joined the European Community in 1973, its farmers received subsidies that rewarded production and – when that led to wasteful surpluses – simply for holding farmland. In 2017, some £2.73bn was disbursed in this way. For decades, farmers justified their subsidies by citing the continuing need for British self-sufficiency in food production, despite the fact that in many cases they were only solvent thanks to European subsidies. During that time, there was still only minimal awareness that the relentless drive for higher yields through intensive methods might be bad for the environment. The few farmers who questioned the prevailing wisdom faced ostracism by their peers.
So Charles Burrell discovered in 2000, when he declared defeat after a decade and a half of intensive farming at Knepp, his 1,400-hectare estate in the south of England. Burrell had invested in automatic feeding systems, state-of-the-art combine harvesters and gallons of fertilisers and pesticides in order to coax more milk from his cows and higher yields from the stodgy Sussex clay. But for 13 of his 15 years in charge, Burrell sank more money into the farm than he received in revenues, and the estate was £1.5m overdrawn. In February 2000, he told his employees that he was coming out of farming.
“The farm workers … left the office grimly shaking their heads,” his wife, Isabella Tree, recalled in Wilding, the book she wrote about the couple’s experiences. But if liquidation was shocking, Burrell’s decision to seek public money to turn his farm into a “biodiverse wilderness”, and his aim to turn a profit through tourism and organic meat, seemed downright perverse.
Longhorn cattle at Knepp in West Sussex. Photograph: Picasa/PR
In 2001, starting with a small section of the estate and gradually expanding as funding became available, Burrell stopped ploughing the land and spraying it with chemicals. Removing internal fences allowed the wild Exmoor ponies and Tamworth pigs he introduced to browse and rootle over large distances, their disruptions creating habitats for other animals and plants. Dung beetles dived into delicious organic cowpats left by longhorn cattle that hadn’t been fed wormers and parasiticides; voles colonised the roots of a dead oak that under the previous regime would have been felled in the interests of tidiness. The summer of 2002 revealed wildflowers with delightful names such as bird’s-foot trefoil and lady’s bedstraw that hadn’t been seen in such numbers for a generation, along with a profusion of insects, which produced a continuous thrum – “something”, in Tree’s words, “we hadn’t even known we’d been missing”.
Much bigger and more ambitious rewilding schemes than Knepp are currently underway across Europe. But whatever the challenges that face international conservationists who are restoring the largely abandoned Coa Valley of northern Portugal, or those at work in Swedish Lapland (population: 1,000), mass hostility from the locals isn’t one of them. Rewilding in the densely populated Sussex Weald was a tougher sell.
In August 2003, Burrell invited local farmers to Knepp with the aim of converting them to the project. As he laid out his vision of fields and hedges devolving into scrub and wetland, his audience erupted with anger. “It wasn’t simply that our neighbours (including some other members of the family) thought this wasn’t right for them,” Tree wrote. “It was more visceral … an affront to the efforts of every self-respecting farmer, an immoral waste of land, an assault on Britishness itself.”
By 2008, Knepp was suffused by weeds such as ragwort, whose vivid yellow flowers are great for pollinators but can kill livestock in the rare event that they are eaten in large amounts. In a letter to the West Sussex County Times, a critic resorted to doggerel to denounce Knepp’s “ragwort shame, spread like the plague, and who’s to blame?”
When I visited Knepp after heavy rain last autumn, what had been arable fields were a sodden mishmash of young trees, billowing hedges and fleabane stalks, naturally occurring growths that have enhanced Knepp’s capacity for carbon capture. In 2011, Burrell had deliberately collapsed the banks of the River Adur where it runs through his property in order to create the kind of accommodating plain that floods harmlessly after heavy rain.
Burrell’s flood-plain and the ramblers’ paths that criss-cross the estate constitute what the government defines as “public goods”: services provided to society without material profit. They have helped quiet much of the local opposition to Knepp’s rewilding. Meanwhile, wildlife tourism has turned Knepp into a successful business that employs more people than it did when it was a farm. Springtime overnighters snuggling down in a luxury treehouse after a soak in the open-air, wood-fired Swedish Hikki bathtub may hear nightingales serenading their consorts; they can take home organic Knepp chops to remember the free-running Tamworths by. Tree’s book Wilding has sold so well that its author recently appeared on the BBC’s Desert Island Discs, an indication of impending national treasure status.
Burrell is nowadays asked about his methods by farmers from around the country. But Knepp is not easy to emulate; its success lies partly in its rarity and its aristocratic charm – Burrell is a baronet who lives in a rinky-dink castle. Nor are the farmers who consult him necessarily converts to rewilding. As Burrell himself says: “These guys may not like it, but they don’t know what the future holds and are being forced to engage.”
At present, in addition to the EU subsidy they receive for holding agricultural land, farmers who provide public goods, such as fostering wildflowers and mitigating flood risk, can claim EU environmental subsidies. But take-up has been patchy; between 2014 and 2017, environmental disbursals fell from £489m to £399m, a reflection of what farmers call the government’s overly prescriptive approach.
The brutal fact is that government policy is about to get a lot more prescriptive. With Britain’s withdrawal from the EU, the government is scrapping the subsidy system which has kept British farming in stasis for years – and on which the livelihoods of many thousands depend. Under the agriculture bill currently before parliament, subsidies will be redirected at public goods alone . If a farmer does not provide such services, they will have to live off sales of their produce. This may not be a problem for the UK’s bigger farming companies, but impossible for many of the smaller family-owned enterprises whose annual subsidy is currently all that keeps them from insolvency.
Hence the queue of worried farmers outside Burrell’s door. Knepp may hold the secret to rehabilitating the tarnished name of British farming. The more candid of the country’s farmers admit that they have suffered a calamitous fall in public esteem. From being the devoted fillers of the nation’s larders and the custodians of rural heritage, farmers, as one lamented to me, are increasingly seen as people who “take public money while raping the land”.
Intensive arable farming is designed to raise yields and eliminate pests and disease. The more fertilisers, pesticides, herbicides and fungicides are used, the bigger the harvests. Back in the chemical-free, weed-infested 1940s, Charles Burrell’s great-grandfather was lucky if he got two tonnes of wheat per hectare. Nowadays, farmers using high-yielding varieties would expect to harvest 10 tonnes of wheat per hectare, usually after applying pesticides, ammonium nitrate fertiliser, and a sprinkling of Roundup – a weedkiller found to have caused non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma among farmers . Overlooking their carcinogenic properties, the right chemicals – and the right weather – bring amazing results. In 2015, a farmer from Northumberland posted a yield of 16.52 tonnes per hectare, winning him a place in the Guinness Book of Records.
For all the role that chemicals have played in improving yields, creating a loyal customer base among many of Britain’s 17,000-odd farms, there is a growing appreciation of the long-term environmental damage they cause. With repeated application over several years, chemicals kill the tiny mycorrhizal fungi that supply roots with water and nutrients, as well as earthworms that provide aeration and improve drainage.
Overuse of these chemicals, along with the mania for stripping out hedgerows and scrub that provide food and shelter for many animals, has led to a calamitous loss of wildlife. More than 40% of species in Britain have been declining since 1970, while one in every seven of its wildlife species faces extinction, a much worse record than the world average.
Then there is the contribution that farming makes to climate change. British agriculture is responsible for 10% of the country’s greenhouse gas emissions, mainly through methane from cows and sheep, nitrous oxides that are produced by fertilisers, and CO2 that comes off the land when carbon-rich organic matter in the soil oxidises during ploughing.
