'If the tanks aren’t new there is the risk that something they previously held may be harmful to the cattle,' he said.
This poisoning incident is the second stock death of its type that the vet has been called to in four months.
Urea poisoning is an ever-present risk to livestock in some parts of the country, such as the Northern Territory, and can quickly cause death.
Michael Ferguson, the owner and head vet, said this is 'one of the awful realities of the drought'
Signs of the poisoning can include twitching ears and facial muscles, frothy saliva, abdominal pain and rapid breathing.
Urea is commonly used as a feed additive, typically mixed with molasses, but in extremely small doses.
'You do however need to introduce it slowly and in a controlled dose, in an energy source like molasses, so that the ruminal bacteria become accustomed to it to and are able to use it as a source of nitrogen and protein.' he said.
Animals are typically found near the source of the urea if they have had too much.
The clinic has sent off a water sample to the Elizabeth Macarthur Agricultural Institute for testing.
'This is a reflection of the measures that farmers are taking to do the best they can to look after their stock and to provide good feed and water,' Mr Ferguson said.
'Creeks and rivers are running dry, and as was the case in this instance, there’s good people trying to keep these poor animals alive and healthy. And, through no fault of their own, the very things they’re doing to help their livestock is sometimes ending in tragedy.
'I hope that the attention that has come to this case serves as a warning to other farmers. This is the second incidence we’ve seen of this in a very short period, and with no end in sight for drought conditions, farmers need to be aware of the danger of using recycled tanks if they’re not 100 per cent sure of what they stored previously. Or how they’ve been decontaminated.'
Currently level one water restrictions are in place in New South Wales but level two will come into place on December 10.
Some of the restrictions mean you can only use a watering can or bucket to water the garden before 10am and after 4pm.
You can only top up pools or spa using a trigger nozzle or bucket for 15 minutes a day - and it is only to replace evaporated water.
Permits are needed to fill new pools that hold more than 500L and cars can only be washed with a bucket or sponge.
Smart watering or drip irrigations can only be used for 15 minutes a day before 10am and after 4pm.
Share or comment on this article:
