newspaper because, as a global disease expert, he has investigated things like
the rapidly-spreading coronavirus that started in China.
In 2019 I had a conversation with Osterholm, who is based at
wildlife throughout the Northern Rockies: chronic wasting disease.
cow to the Minnesota state legislature:
consumption of contaminated meat will be documented in the years ahead. It is
Here are some excerpts from our conversation:
forceful warning before the Minnesota legislature?
one of those things, like so many issues, that I could work 28-hours-a-day on.
I’ve been very involved with influenza outbreaks and other diseases, like
Ebola, and traveling 200,000-miles-a-year for work. CWD should be regarded on
the same scale of other diseases we are worried about.
I just became more and more unsettled about this issue. I
existing between species that would keep everything from coming to humans. It
was something I thought was naïve and my suspicions were validated.
At the time, some said you were just a scare monger, that
kind of person who just needlessly upsets people. And, of course, the story’s
been told since that time. I wasn’t alone and our worries were indeed
methods that can be done on site, [and are] reliable, cheap and effective.
tradition and a management tool to be reduced. Right now there are 200,000 white-tailed-deer-a-year
by providing the best available knowledge.
animals passing through meat processing facilities.
MO: Yes, the second thing I’m very concerned about,
when you introduce CWD into meat processing environments? If somebody’s deer or
elk comes through and it’s contaminated, what does that mean for everything
and decontaminate places and surfaces that become tainted with prions.
TW: You’ve taken your concern a step further,
emphasizing your fear that with potential prion mutation, CWD could cross a
species barrier from cervids to domestic livestock and then reach people.
what it means to the bovine world.
Is there going to be potential cross exposure [to cattle] and would that happen? The ag people can’t just back out of the conversation about it potentially reaching livestock and, of course, public health officials need to be paying attention to the human side. The World Health Organization and CDC advisement to not eat suspected meat is limp compared to what we need. A lot of CWD-infected deer and elk may not look sick.
crisis but I am suggesting that it could be. Why do we want to experiment with
TW: As CWD continues to spread, what are your
contact is really unclear. I think the human exposure question involves really,
for me, the venison and game meat consumption issue. The extent of using your
kitchen raises serious questions about contamination. And, in terms of people
coming in contact with lymph nodes and other tissue of infected animals, we
just don’t know the degree of risk but that doesn’t mean risk doesn’t exist.
and mutations that can occur. Is your concern that it’s only a matter of time?
at the accelerating number of cases. This is out of control in the wildlife
Todd Wilkinson is the founder of Bozeman-based “ Mountain Journal ” and is a correspondent for “National Geographic.” He’s also the author of “ Grizzlies of Pilgrim Creek ” about famous Jackson Hole grizzly bear 399.
