KUTZTOWN, Pa. — Amid lush greenery, Herefords, with their deep crimson hides and white masks, lounge in pastures along the gravel drive of Oak Lane Farm.
Ron De Fulvio began raising cattle after retiring from Bethlehem Steel Corp. in 1998. His goal was to create a herd of premier seedstock that would make good replacements for cow-calf operations.
And he has done just that.
“I’m into it for the cows,” he said.
While his herd might be small at only 10 animals, it is mighty. Before swiping right on a bull, De Fulvio dedicates a majority of his time looking for the ideal match for his herd. He looks at registered farm websites, the American Hereford Association’s genetic database, and advertisements in the organization’s publication, Hereford World.
De Fulvio also talks to owners about the bull’s genetics, which he says leads to some good information that you don’t always get in the expected progeny differences.
“I really get a kick out of the research,” he said.
He even seeks to have his registered polled Herefords stand out from the rest of their masked relatives by selecting bulls that have conservative white patterns on their hides. He prefers breeding his cows with bulls that have more red markings on their neckline, which he says makes the calves look sharper and sleeker.
“The less white I can get on them, the better,” De Fulvio said.
He also values bulls that have good calving ease and disposition.
Ron De Fulvio of Kutztown, Pennsylvania, is committed to finding the ideal bull for his small seedstock operation. He prefers his Polled Hereford to have more red markings than white ones on his calves.
Most of his calf crop go on to grace the tanbark as 4-H projects or at national shows through bigger cattle operations.
De Fulvio works with a local Select Sires technician to artificially inseminate his cows. He works on synching the cows to be in heat at the right time to have calves born in late April or early May. This year, however, one of the females decided to buck the synch, which required him to track her individual heat cycle. Her calf will born in June.
Each of his females has unique personalities, he said, grinning.
Being a seedstock producer in Pennsylvania, De Fulvio sometimes feels limited in selling his calf crop.
In 2017, Pennsylvania had a total of 625,530 cows and calves, according to the USDA Census of Agriculture, ranking it 27th in the nation for cattle production. De Fulvio feels limited because Pennsylvania doesn’t have a big demand for seedstock like in the Midwest. Most of the producers in Pennsylvania are small-scale, commercial cow-calf operations that don’t always like to pay a lot of money for registered replacement heifers or breeding bulls.
But registered cattle like De Fulvio’s can give a cow-calf producer information that assists in forming the future big picture of their herds. De Fulvio records every detail of his calf crop from their birth on the farm until their sale day. Using the software CattleWorks, he records each of the calves’ identifications, such as their registration, tattoo and USDA electronic tag numbers. He also tracks deworming dates, veterinary visits, birth and weaning weights. He inoculates the heifers for brucellosis, a severe bacterial disease. The calves are also DNA tested, which can prove that their genetics are 100% able to carry the polled trait, he said.
Polled Herefords were bred to have the marbling and carcass qualities similar to their ancestors — the Horned Hereford of Hereford County, England — but with one notable difference: no horns. Over time, the breed developed a mutation that naturally and homogeneously keeps the breed hornless, according to Oklahoma State University.
De Fulvio feeds his cattle a blended ration of corn, beet pulp and Purina’s Stocker Grower to achieve a 15 to 18% protein diet. He also buys around 18 tons of mixed grass and alfalfa hay per year, from a farm in Kempton, that he rations throughout the winter and spring.
The cattle are rotated every three to five days all year in five pastures on the 15-acre farm. His pastures are made up of orchard grass, clover and various mixed grasses.
The cattle also are given mineral supplements.
De Fulvio usually reseeds his front pasture in late June, after the cattle break up the soil all winter and spring.
Buying a majority of his feedstuff does put a dent in the profit department. He could make hay on some of his pastures, but it wouldn’t be an efficient system for the cows or for him, De Fulvio said.
For the last four years, De Fulvio has been buying back feeder calves from a neighbor who buys one of De Fulvio’s bulls every year for his cow herd. De Fulvio buys back the calves, which are offspring from the neighbor’s cow and De Fulvio’s bull. Buying back stock like this is common in the industry.
De Fulvio raises the steers for custom freezer beef, which is then sold in whole, halves and quarters to about 35 customers.
He likes using Mark Martin of Topton, Pennsylvania, for butchering. Martin handles the entire processing and shrink-wraps all the meat. He estimates that he invests around $1,200 in butchering costs for the custom orders he receives. But that added cost is no worry for De Fulvio.
“I don’t have any trouble selling it,” he said.
As he gets older, De Fulvio has been reducing his workload. He usually purchases four steers, but this year he will be only raising two. The reduction will give his customers some competition over availability of cuts.
De Fulvio is an active member of the New Jersey Hereford Association, Pennsylvania Hereford Association, the Pennsylvania Cattlemen’s Association and their affiliate, Berks/Southeast Cattlemen’s Association. One of his proudest achievements was winning seed stock producer of the year from the Pennsylvania Cattlemen’s Association in 2017.
Softly stroking a gloved hand along the neck of an almost year-old bull, De Fulvio’s eyes light up as he speaks to the striking animal. “I just enjoy it,” he said.
