There’s a Meat Shortage Coming. Tyson Foods Looks Like a Good Bet.
World population is estimated to reach 10 billion by 2050, requiring an estimated doubling of protein production.
This past week, Tyson Foods , the country’s largest meat company, warned that the coronavirus endangers the U.S. food-supply chain.
In full-page advertisements in national newspapers, John H. Tyson, the company’s chairman, warned that pork, beef, and chicken plants are being closed, removing millions of pounds of meat from the supply chain. This could create food shortages and even the mass destruction of millions of chickens, pigs, and cattle. Without processing plants, most farmers have nowhere to sell livestock.
“The food supply chain is breaking,” he wrote.
By Tuesday, President Donald Trump signed an order that used the power of the Defense Production Act to classify meat processing as a critical infrastructure. Tyson stock rallied and closed the day smartly higher, but that was of little comfort to meat plant workers.
The United Food and Commercial Workers International Union responded by asking the president for rules to protect even more workers from getting sick and dying. Tyson stock appears to be in a holding pattern ahead of its second-quarter earnings report, to be released Monday.
Tyson (ticker: TSN) is expected to earn $1.05 a share, down from $1.20 in the year-ago quarter. Estimates have declined by 27% in the past three months, likely reflecting the current difficulties and seasonal patterns. The company advised investors during its last earnings call that the second quarter is traditionally weaker than the first quarter.
Despite the worsening outlook, Tyson shares have gained about 41% since mid-March, almost double the performance of the S&P 500 index .
Tyson’s options are priced as if the stock will make an earnings-related move of about 8%, up or down, compared with an average realized move on earnings of about 4%, up or down, over the past eight quarters.
Exclusive data, tables and charts from Barron's Market Lab.
While it is tempting to speculate on Tyson’s earnings, it is difficult to confidently assert a short-term direction. What is evident is Tyson’s long-term outperformance versus the S&P 500. Since 1980, the stock has advanced 9,340%, compared with 3,186% for the index. Its performance has been bumpy the past few years, but the demand for meat hasn’t abated and is forecast to sharply increase over the next 25 years.
To position, investors can buy Tyson stock and enhance the position with a “call spread.” With the stock around $64, investors can create a call spread by buying the January $65 call option and selling the January $75 call for $4.30.
The strategy is used when investors think the associated stock will advance and they want to lower the cost of the options position, though this limits the returns. Still, spreads are popular among aggressive investors who focus on the potential to earn triple-digit gains if everything works as expected.
Should Tyson stock be at $75 at expiration, the spread’s maximum profit is $5.70.
The earnings report will provide some much-needed clarity and likely offer an opportunity to trade options and buy stock without inflated fear and greed premiums.
During the past 52 weeks, Tyson shares have ranged from $42.57 to $94.24. The stock is down 30.5% this year and 15.4% over the past 52 weeks.
The suggested strategy reflects a belief in buying good companies when the stock price is weak and the macro themes are attractive.
On Tyson’s first-quarter earnings call in early February, the company told investors that it had completed six consecutive quarters of growth, and it was making plans for an even brighter future.
The company also announced the formation of the Coalition to Advance the Future of Sustainable Protein at the World Economic Forum in Davos to address ways to feed the world. Tyson CEO Noel White said world population is estimated to reach 10 billion by 2050, requiring an estimated doubling of protein production.
There’s a Meat Shortage Coming. Tyson Foods Looks Like a Good Bet.
This past week, Tyson Foods, the country’s largest meat company, warned that the coronavirus endangers the U.
