Harvesting sorghum at Scott Creek Station in 1972.
Mr Bremner was also involved in the construction of accommodation to house 80 people at Scott Creek and about 20 people at Willeroo.
In 1971 NADC became a publicly listed company and reportedly was attracting a lot of interest from overseas investors, including the Bank of Tokyo and the Bank of America.
NADC was starting to build its cattle herd, purchasing a lot of stock from the nearby Victoria River District.
In 1972 the company had planted 9,700 hectares of sorghum and sold grain to the Ingham's chicken farm near Darwin, the Darwin piggery, and export markets were reportedly getting locked in, including a big contract with Japan.
Jock Bremner [left] getting interviewed by the ABC's Peter Knudsen.
The NADC went into voluntary administration in July 1974.
Mr Bremner said a lot of the company's bold plans were just not feasible, the sorghum yields did not reach expectations and, as the project got bigger, the money started to run dry.
"It was a good entrepreneurial project, but they didn't finance it properly," he said.
Mr Bremner said the broad-acre sorghum crop relied on rain that fell over the wet season months and yielded about three-quarters of a tonne per acre (1.85 tonnes a hectare), which was not viable.
He said the "real nail in the coffin for Scott Creek" was the cattle price slump of 1974.
According to reports at the time by the NT Newspaper, one of the NADC's last acts before going into voluntary administration was an auction of more than 800 of its feedlot cattle.
Described as the Territory's "biggest and best cattle auction in memory", the average price for the sale was a disastrous $105 a head for heavy bullocks.
"The cattle have been at the grain-sorghum feedlot [on Scott Creek] for up to 250 days at an estimated cost of $1 a day," reported the NT News.
"The loss per steer was estimated at sale as between $200 and $250.
One of the major buyers was the Angliss abattoir in Darwin.
Jock Bremner, who was the sale auctioneer, said the bank soon recognised NADC's equity was not there "and they pulled the plug pronto and that was the end of it".
Willeroo joined a growing list of large-scale agricultural development projects that had failed in the north during this period, including the Territory Rice project at Humpty Doo that ceased operation in 1963 and a similar sorghum project at nearby Tipperary Station, which stopped in 1971.
In more recent times, Scott Creek has had around 1,400 hectares of cleared country, which the owners have used to grow fodder crops.
Another financial disaster for NADC involved a scandalous hold-up of about 10,000 tonnes of grain at the Darwin Port.
The ABC has been told a few different stories about what went wrong.
Former Territory cattle producer, Sarah Henderson, wrote in her book The Strength In Us All, that unseasonable rain in 1973 had damaged the crop "and the head of grain went to mildew, ruining the lot".
Our best stories in your inbox?
"The forward contract [with a Japanese company] didn't mention anything about mildew sorghum, but it did mention that only a certain percentage of foreign seed could be present in the grain," she wrote.
"When the grain arrived at the ship, random tests were done and the presence of foreign seed was over the allowed percentage.
But according to the NT Newspaper at the time, the grain had been bought by the Soviet Union "but was found to contain the poisonous legume, crotalaria, and had to be cleaned at a cost of $35,000," it wrote.
According to Mr Bremner the grain was eventually exported, but problems at the port began when the owner of the Darwin piggery allegedly made a claim about the health of the grain.
"When the boat was pulled in to take the grain, the Darwin piggery rang the Department of Agriculture and said 'this has got crotalaria in it and it's killing my pigs'," Mr Bremner said.
"They had to stop the boat and a cleaner came up from New South Wales to clean the entire crop [that was stored] in the shed, which was a big disaster right at the end.
"It got cleaned and eventually sent out, which cost money and time, but by that stage the place had nearly folded up anyway."
The Government's bungled attempt to buy Willeroo Station made regular headlines.
In 1978 Willeroo Station, which was still in the hands of the receivers, H V Quinton and Co of Sydney, was making regular front page news in the NT, as the NT Government bungled its way through a plan to buy the property.
According to the NT News, the negotiations between the Paul Everingham-led Government and the receivers had been stumbling along for 10 months and eventually broke down in April 1978.
It said the Government then loaned $150,000 to the receiver to cover the cost of trial crops and to pay employees at the stations.
"Employees and suppliers were not being paid because both the Government and the receiver were denying responsibility," it wrote.
The Labor Opposition during this time called for a full inquiry into the negotiations and for the Primary Industry Minister Roger Steele to step down, labelling the "Willeroo affair" as a "sham and a farce".
In September a man from the United States named Luke Wise, who owned Benmara Station in the nearby Barkly region, swooped in and bought Willeroo for around $1 million.
"The NT Government has missed its chance to buy controversial Willeroo-Scott Creek Station," said the NT News front page on September 25, 1978.
"The Government had an option to purchase the properties but because of its stupidity, its intransigence and its financial incompetence, we have now lost a great opportunity to assist development of agricultural industries in the NT," Opposition Primary Industry spokesman Jack Doolan said.
The Gschwenter family, who have owned Scott Creek Station since 2008, have recently sold the property to the Buratovich family from Argentina.
Since the collapse of the NADC, Willeroo and Scott Creek Station have had multiple owners including the Sultan of Brunei.
Willeroo is now owned by Gina Rinehart's Hancock Prospecting and Scott Creek has recently been bought by an agricultural company based in Argentina, which has its own plans for cropping in the region.
Mr Bremner said it will be interesting to see how plans for Top End cotton unfolds , and felt the new owners could definitely learn a lot from the mistakes of the past.
He said there were now examples around the north of cattle and cropping ventures working well, but on a much smaller scale to what was attempted at Scott Creek.
