The police on Sunday arrested a cattle trader from Jokatte here on the charge of illegally transporting four head of cattle. Meanwhile, a case was registered against a group of activists said to be from the Bajrang Dal for allegedly assaulting the trader when he was transporting the cattle.
The Urwa Police said that Mohammed Jokatte was found transporting the cattle even as a group of activists waylaid the vehicle near the police station. Mohammed Jokatte did not have any documents for transporting the cattle from Jokatte to an abattoir in Kudroli. He was booked under the provisions of the Karnataka Prevention of Slaughter and Preservation of Cattle Act.
Mohammed Jokatte also filed a complaint against the activists said to be from the Bajrang Dal accusing them of assaulting him. The police have registered his complaint against the activists, who are yet to be identified, under Sections 323 (hurt) and 506 (criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code.
Meanwhile, Bajrang Dal activists circulated on social media an image of Mohammed Jokatte tied to the vehicle in which he was transporting the cattle.
Condemning the act of the activists, Social Democratic Party of India’s Mangaluru City South Assembly unit president Suhail Khan said that the activists have made an attempt to create communal tension by attacking Mohammed Jokatte. Rightful intervention by the police helped in preventing the matter from getting escalated, he said and added that those involved in the attack should be arrested at the earliest.
You have reached your limit for free articles this month.
Start your 14 days trial now. Sign Up
Find mobile-friendly version of articles from the day's newspaper in one easy-to-read list.
Enjoy reading as many articles as you wish without any limitations.
A select list of articles that match your interests and tastes.
Move smoothly between articles as our pages load instantly.
A one-stop-shop for seeing the latest updates, and managing your preferences.
We brief you on the latest and most important developments, three times a day.
Not convinced? Know why you should pay for news.
*Our Digital Subscription plans do not currently include the e-paper ,crossword, iPhone, iPad mobile applications and print. Our plans enhance your reading experience.
We have been keeping you up-to-date with information on the developments in India and the world that have a bearing on our health and wellbeing, our lives and livelihoods, during these difficult times. To enable wide dissemination of news that is in public interest, we have increased the number of articles that can be read free, and extended free trial periods. However, we have a request for those who can afford to subscribe: please do. As we fight disinformation and misinformation, and keep apace with the happenings, we need to commit greater resources to news gathering operations. We promise to deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Your support for our journalism is invaluable. It’s a support for truth and fairness in journalism. It has helped us keep apace with events and happenings.
The Hindu has always stood for journalism that is in the public interest. At this difficult time, it becomes even more important that we have access to information that has a bearing on our health and well-being, our lives, and livelihoods. As a subscriber, you are not only a beneficiary of our work but also its enabler.
We also reiterate here the promise that our team of reporters, copy editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers will deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Please enter a valid email address.
var data = {"email" : email, "category" : "newsletter"};
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 768px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
box-shadow: 0 0 4px 0 rgba(0, 0, 0, .328);
@media ( max-width : 320px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 1023px) and (min-width: 1px) {
@media ( max-width : 767px) and (min-width: 1px) {
