In the week ending 6 June, GB deadweight cattle prices rose strongly again across the board. The all-prime GB price averaged 353.0p/kg, up nearly 8p on the week. The price is 9.1p above the same week last year, and 8.0p above the five-year average.
Weekly deadweight prime cattle average price movements:
Estimated abattoir throughputs stood at 34,800 head for the week, up 3,500 head on the week.
Cow prices also continued upwards, although growth was slightly more subdued than that of prime prices. The overall average cow price totalled 251.6p/kg, while –O4L cows averaged 268.2p/kg; both measures up 4.4p on the week. The overall cow price is now 7.8p higher than last year and 6.9p above the five-year average.
Estimated cow throughputs for the week stood at 12,400 head, up 2,400 head on the week before. The previous week included a bank holiday, but considering price movements, it is likely that producers are looking to capitalise on stronger returns.
Good weather during the week reportedly boosted consumer demand for beef as BBQs were fired up, while the reopening of fast food outlets helped to support the cull cow trade.
See our coronavirus weekly retail tracker for the latest data on beef sales.
You can subscribe to receive Beef and Lamb market news straight to your inbox. Simply fill in your contact details on our online form.
The UK wheat crop is expected to be smaller year-on-year, with UK crop conditions now varying across regions.
After several weeks of sharp rises, GB cattle prices were largely steady this week.
The drought in Australia has ended, and cattle farmers there are now looking to restock which limit production this year.
The post-coronavirus recovery of Ireland’s beef throughputs could cast uncertainty over GB prices.
Prime cattle supplies have picked up slightly, attracted by the higher prices, but also perhaps by farmers looking to take the pressure off available grazing.
In April, both UK imports and exports of fresh/frozen beef fell 15% year-on-year.
Overall the disruption and uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to continue for many more months. For a second consecutive year, global meat production is expected to contract.
Deadweight cattle prices continued to climb during the week ending 13 June.
UK beef and veal production in May totalled 67,700 tonnes, down 13% year-on-year.
The lack of rainfall, particularly across England and Wales, has started to seriously restrict grass growth.
The GB all-prime average price rose 8p in the week ending 6 June to 353.0p/kg.
Beef production in the EU was down 0.4% in March compared to the previous year.
Red meat demand appears to have bounced back and is now overall slightly up year-on-year. Beef and pork have both recorded growth, while lamb is steady.
Across the board GB deadweight cattle prices have continued on an upwards trend. During the week ending 30 May, the all-prime average measure increased 7.5p week-on-week.
The GB cattle population at 1 April 2020 was smaller than at the same point in 2019, according to data from British Cattle Movement Service. The total number of cattle under 30 months was back by around 74,500 head.
The UK retail market currently prices mince and top cuts slightly differently than other countries, including those operating in the global beef market.
There have been many significant challenges in the US beef market since March.
The continued lack of significant rainfall in the UK has raised concerns for the quality of the quality of the planted crop.
The all-prime GB average price rose 7.7p on the week, to average 337.6p/kg.
