Processors are operating at less than full capacity, leading farmers to slaughter herds.
Rich has been a Fool since 1998 and writing for the site since 2004. After 20 years of patrolling the mean streets of suburbia, he hung up his badge and gun to take up a pen full time. Having made the streets safe for Truth, Justice, and Krispy Kreme donuts, he now patrols the markets looking for companies he can lock up as long-term holdings in a portfolio.
His coverage reflects his passion for motorcycles, booze, and guns (though typically not all exercised at the same time), but his writing also covers the broader sectors of consumer goods, technology, and industrials. So follow along as he tries to break down complex topics to make them more understandable and useful to the average investor.
Have a story idea? Contact Rich here . I may not be able to respond to every suggestion, but I do read them all! Think an article needs a correction? Reach Rich here .
The meat shortage that's led fast-food chain Wendy's ( NASDAQ:WEN ) to begin removing burgers from menus at some of its restaurants will last for months, according to JBS ( OTC:JBSA.Y ), one of the biggest producers of beef and pork products.
Andre Nogueira, CEO of the Brazilian meat processor, which has production facilities in Colorado, Minnesota, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, and supplies nearly a quarter of the country's beef and one-fifth of its pork, told The Wall Street Journal the health and safety measures it implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic means "we will not be able to go to full capacity anytime soon."
JBS, along with other protein processors such as Tyson Foods ( NYSE:TSN ) and Smithfield Foods, have had to close down processing plants due to outbreaks of the coronavirus, but as they've reopened, they're operating at less than full capacity.
Workers are now spaced farther apart while others have stayed home, either because they are sick or out of concern for their health. JBS says it has hired 1,000 new employees, though most have been assigned to extra cleaning duties at its facilities.
JBS is operating at 70% to 95% of their normal capacity, and with the slowdown at other processing facilities, cattle and hog farmers are slaughtering herds. So despite JBS directing its meat supply to domestic outlets instead of selling internationally, there will still be less meat in the meat cases at supermarkets and grocery stores for the foreseeable future.
