“A total of 43,103 stray cattle have been adopted as on January 16. The adoption had slowed due to cold but it is expected to pick up once the weather turns warmer. We expect to meet the target by March 15,” animal husbandry department additional director Arvind Singh told ET.
LUCKNOW: The Uttar Pradesh government has facilitated adoption of over 43,000 cattle , less than half the target of one hundred thousand, four months after it notified a scheme which offered farmers Rs 30 a day, per animal, to tackle the problem of stray cattle .
“A total of 43,103 stray cattle have been adopted as on January 16. The adoption had slowed due to cold but it is expected to pick up once the weather turns warmer. We expect to meet the target by March 15,” animal husbandry department additional director Arvind Singh told ET. Singh said that the department could recommend to the state to increase the animal adoption target to 150,000 next year.
An estimated one million stray cattle has been troubling farmers in Uttar Pradesh by destroying their crops ever since the Yogi Adityanath-led government banned slaughter of cows and its progeny since assuming power in 2017.
The Nirashrit/Besahara Govansh Sahbhagita scheme was devised in August and implemented a month later. Reports had said that Rs 30 was inadequate for feeding an animal for a day. Last month, 25 cows were reported dead in a cow shelter in Banda due to ‘cold and lack of food’.
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
