Why did lamb prices fall while prime cattle prices remained steady?
The first thing to note is that this is a volatile and fast moving situation, and a number of auction markets have closed from today (24 March).
Yesterday liveweight lamb prices fell sharply. The daily GB OSL SQQ declined by almost 73p week-on-week, which is equivalent to around £30/head, to 188.64p/kg.
Such a sharp change is almost unprecedented. The average cull ewe price also declined, by almost £37, to £71.70/head. Throughputs of lambs also dropped sharply to just shy of 19,000 head. Up until yesterday lamb prices had been holding their ground at around 240p/kg. This was despite throughputs increasing sharply in recent weeks.
There were some rumours yesterday that France was closing its border to UK exports. This is not the case, and the border between us and France remains open to commercial traffic although there are some extra checks in place. Food products are on the list for priority entry through EU borders and lorry drivers are temporarily allowed to work on Sundays in France to help commercial traffic flow.
However, there have been some additional restrictions announced overnight in France, which further limits the population’s movements. All open-air city markets are now closed, although markets in small rural villages where they are the only place to purchase food in the area can remain open. The closure of the city markets is expected to have a large effect on demand for wholesalers and regional and national wholesale markets.
Lamb demand in France has been described as currently very low. In a similar situation as we have seen here in the UK, shoppers panic bought and stocked up. Many consumers are now eating through those stocks. The further restrictions announced overnight are expected to lead to an increase in shopping again, but this time most likely of poultry and pork rather than more expensive beef and lamb.
Throughout Europe lamb demand at Easter is expected to be low. This could lead to a significant over supply of leg cuts which are a staple product for many at Easter. Retailers in some European countries have cancelled their Easter lamb marketing campaigns.
Looking at domestic demand. Lamb typically performs very well at pubs and independent restaurants , and with those now closed, there is likely to be downwards pressure on UK lamb consumption. Although, some out of home eating is expected to move to within home, different meals and smaller portions are typically eaten at home compared to when eating out.
Prices for prime cattle were largely steady, although cull cow prices did decline 10p week-on-week. Beef demand could be described as a double-edged sword currently. Demand for mince is reported to be strong, which is good. However, this is not good for promoting carcase balance at current prices. With borders remaining open, imports/exports should help to balance this situation.
As this is a developing situation, we will continue to keep you up to date on all the latest prices and trends.
You can subscribe to receive Beef and Lamb market news straight to your inbox. Simply fill in your contact details on our online form.
Liveweight and deadweight new season lamb prices rose by 2p and 2.5p in the latest week, respectively.
The UK wheat crop is expected to be smaller year-on-year, with UK crop conditions now varying across regions.
Liveweight lamb prices have had a bumper week this week. The GB liveweight NSL SQQ gained 12p, to 226.64p/kg. Industry reports suggest supplies were below demand.
During April UK exports of fresh and frozen primary sheep meat totalled just over 6,100 tonnes, down 2,300 tonnes year-on-year. UK export volumes were expected to contract due to the on-going COVID-19 situation both here, and on the continent.
Overall the disruption and uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to continue for many more months. For a second consecutive year, global meat production is expected to contract.
During the week ending 17 June the seasonal downwards pressure on lamb prices remained. The GB liveweight NSL SQQ dropped almost 20p, to 214.28p/kg.
Lamb kill production in May had many of the same trends as in April. Numbers forwards were significantly down (-22%) on-the-year, at 766,000 head.
Lamb prices decline Liveweight prices continued to follow the seasonal trend this week. In the week ended 10 June, the GB liveweight NSL SQQ fell by 4p, to 234.22p/kg.
The lack of rainfall, particularly across England and Wales, has started to seriously restrict grass growth.
In the week ended 30 May, the GB deadweight NSL SQQ dropped almost 19p, to 526.7p/kg. Estimated kill has continued on the same trend as it has for most of 2020.
Red meat demand appears to have bounced back and is now overall slightly up year-on-year. Beef and pork have both recorded growth, while lamb is steady.
In the latest week, finished liveweight lamb prices continued to slip, while deadweight rose.
NZ lamb exports to China recover, Europe down
Exports from New Zealand were subdued during quarter one. pril brought with it a change in dynamic. With many Asian countries, including China, beginning to recover from coronavirus, shipments increased. Exports to Europe however dropped, as demand was weak, also due to coronavirus.
The continued lack of significant rainfall in the UK has raised concerns for the quality of the quality of the planted crop.
Liveweight lamb prices eased in the week ending 20 May, while deadweight prices rose in the week ending 16 May.
Earlier this week the UK government announced the new Most Favoured Nation (MFN) tariff regime which will apply to all imports from countries who do not have a trade deal with the UK. For beef and lamb, the tariffs broadly mirror the level of the EU’s current Common External Tariffs.
Production took a sharp decline during April to just 21,000 tonnes cwe. UK lamb kill declined 21% (227,800 head) year-on-year, to 835,900 head.
During the first quarter of 2020 New Zealand beef exports grew, while sheep meat exports declined. Production in New Zealand only really became affected by coronavirus in April, which will only then have limited available volumes of export.
