With lush pastures and a temperate climate, the island is feeding a growing demand for grass-fed beef.
King Island cattle. There is growing demand for naturally raised grass-fed beef over grain-fed.
Flying into King Island, it’s easy to see why its beef is so good to eat. From the air, lush green pastures carpet the landscape – the stuff that the island’s approximately 100,000 cattle, mainly Black Angus and Hereford, eat all year round.
Melbourne restaurateur Philip Kennedy knows this better than most mainlanders. He should. The owner of Pure South Dining , on Melbourne’s Southbank, has been visiting the island since before he opened his restaurant specialising in Tasmania’s produce 17 years ago.
In fact, it was meeting a couple of beef cattle farmers on his very first trip to the island off the north-west tip of Tasmania in Bass Strait that proved the inspiration for his restaurant. Initially, Kennedy even toyed with opening a King Island steakhouse, but then widened his focus to embrace all of Tasmania.
Pure South Dining in Melbourne's Southbank specialises in Tasmanian produce.
“My first trip to King Island gave me goosebumps,” he recalls as we ready to board a flight to the island for a tour of some of its beef cattle farms. “It got me started.”
For this visit, Kennedy is part a select group of Australian chefs and restaurateurs  – along with butchers, wholesalers and distributors – invited to the island by JBS Australia, the country’s largest meat-processing company, to meet some of the 60-odd farmers who supply it with 200 to 300 head of grass-fed cattle every week. With a total herd of about 100,000 spread across 1098 square kilometres, there is almost one head of cattle for every hectare on the island.
It gives chefs greater confidence to understand the provenance of their product.
For JBS, the visit is the culmination of a year-long project spent revitalising and repositioning its King Island Beef brand in response to growing demand for naturally raised grass-fed beef over grain-fed.
At the heart of its initiative is the introduction of several flagship restaurants – initially Australia-wide, but in time internationally – that have agreed to act as unpaid “ambassadors” for King Island Beef in return for benefits such as guaranteed supply and quality.
In addition to Pure South, there’s Melbourne steakhouse Angus & Bon , Mode Kitchen & Bar in Sydney’s Four Seasons Hotel, A Hereford Beefstouw (in Adelaide and Melbourne), Stillwater and Black Cow Bistro in Launceston, The Astor Grill in Hobart and Mindil Beach Casino Resort in Darwin.
“We came up with this idea of taking our niche brand and identifying restaurants that had a really good cultural fit,” says JBS marketing executive Brad De Luca.
The trip, he explains, is primarily an opportunity for the restaurants to see firsthand where the beef comes from. “It shows chefs the provenance of their product and gives them the confidence to know they can keep the promises they make to their customers,” he says.
Certainly, these days any chef worth their salt will tell you provenance is everything. “When you know the provenance and ethos behind your products, you can pass that onto other chefs and customers,” says Pure South head chef Justin Edwards, who has accompanied Kennedy on the trip.
“If I can see the process from start to finish, you obviously care a lot more about it.”
Mindil Beach Casino Resort executive chef Athol Wark agrees: “Getting that visual and hands-on experience certainly gives us greater insight into more of the paddock-to-plate story."
Pure South's Philip Kennedy has been visiting the island since before he opened his restaurant.
Mark and Anita Poulsen, whose farm is one of the stops on our tour, are part of that story. The Queensland cattle farmers sold up and moved to King Island a couple of years ago to escape the drier, harsher conditions of the north, which required them to grain-feed their cattle.
“People want grass-fed beef, it’s the way of the future,” says Anita. It's also believed to have more flavour.
Standing in the couple’s paddock – part of a 2000-hectare holding – with the last of their herd of mainly Hereford steers being prepared for market, it's even easier to appreciate what was obvious from the air: pastures full of verdant, ankle-high grass, chiefly clover and rye, on sodden sandy loam. It’s five-star round-the-clock grazing for the Poulsens’ mob.
“It was an easy decision for me,” says Mark, explaining the move south. “The reliability of the rain. And the grass.”
It’s not only the almost one litre of rain that King Island gets each year that explains the quality of the beef. It’s the temperate climate – a mild average daily maximum of 21 degrees in the height of summer in February and an equally mild 13.2 degrees in the middle of winter in July.
King Island beef farmer Anita Poulsen says grass-fed beef is the future.
“You don’t get the extremes, the frosts or heat,” says Michael Youd, another farmer we visit. “Surrounded by ocean, we have a mild climate.”
Youd bought his first block to grow cattle 32 years ago. Today, he has four blocks covering 320 hectares. Rather than breeding his own, he now concentrates on preparing cattle he buys to meet a higher grading of beef based on the level of marbling in the meat.
More marbling delivers more tenderness. But it is also resulting in better remuneration for farmers.
Fred Perry, whose family has been farming on the island since the 1950s, believes the island's environment gives the beef a unique flavour. “If you blindfolded me and put six pieces of meat in front of me, I’d pick the King Island,” he says.
Ethically, the market wants natural products and that’s what grass-fed gives it.
It’s not just the weather and rainfall. Farmers on the island do not use antibiotics or growth hormones and there is no feed-lotting. Cattle are raised free range on salt-grass pasture.
“We get tonnes of salt dumped on pastures every year,” says Youd. “It adds to the flavour.”
Backing these favourable conditions, JBS launched a program eight years ago to guarantee food safety, animal welfare and quality.  Under its Great Southern initiative, it introduced a farm assurance program to ensure meat is grown safely and ethically and animals are treated well.
It is is also promising new levels of traceability for King Island Beef. “Starting with primal cuts, we’re going to be able to trace them back to the individual farmer,” says JBS Australia’s Southern chief operating officer, Sam McConnell, who joined the group visiting the island.
You don’t get much better provenance than that, says Philip Kennedy. “Traceability is the best thing to come from the flagship restaurant program,” he says. “It’s real, no bullshit.”
The Danish-designed and built interior of A Hereford Beefstouw in Melbourne.
As we head back to the airport, the mood in the group is upbeat.
“It’s really exciting I can get a brand with provenance,” says A Hereford Beefstouw co-owner Tim Burvill. “Ethically, the market wants natural products and that’s what grass-fed gives it.”
Angus & Bon general manager Drew McCort takes a similar line. “King Island Beef fits in with the ethos of what we do,” he says. “Generation Y is very conscious of what they put into their bodies.”
Back in Melbourne, the group finally has a chance to tuck into some King Island beef over a special dinner at Pure South Dining. Kennedy has opted for a beef wellington to showcase the meat, a medium-cooked succulent fillet wrapped in puff pastry.
But it’s not just meat on a plate. It’s a story that starts with a farmer and ends with a chef.
The writer flew to King Island as a guest of JBS Australia.
