Will Beyond Meat and Impossible Foods Survive Lab Meat’s Challenge?
Plant-based meat substitutes’ long-term viability could be shaken by a new contender.
Some analysts predict the emerging science of cultured meat -- aka lab meat or synthetic meat -- could threaten the market share of "plant-based meat" producers like Beyond Meat ( NASDAQ:BYND ), Impossible Foods, and others in the near future. Growing meat separate from an animal might possibly solve the ethical, environmental, and culinary issues of meat and meat substitutes in one fell swoop. But while Fools investing in food stocks centered on plant-based meat may wonder whether lab meat threatens their portfolio's value, other evidence suggests it might be a proverbial "nothingburger" after all.
People first thought about cultured meat in the 1930s, and scientists grew the first meat outside an animal in the early 1970s. However, methods are just now getting sophisticated enough to produce affordable, high-quality lab meat.
To grow cultured meat, scientists place animal cells (muscle stem cells, fat cells, and collagen) in a nutritional medium inside a bioreactor where they can multiply. Artificial circulation carries nutrients and oxygen to the multiplying cells. The overall process is called "cellular agriculture."
Producing meat while avoiding the death of living animals is cellular agriculture's primary attraction for many people. Scientists also believe it's possible to make the meat healthier while growing it, raising protein content, lowering saturated fat levels (possibly to zero), and enhancing its vitamin content.  Proponents also cite cultured meat's environmental benefits, since it doesn't require land deforestation to make space for grazing land, involves far lower water inputs, and might release fewer greenhouse gases.
Based on these factors, some analysts expect explosive growth in lab meat once it's launched in the next few years. A.T. Kearney projects a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 41% for cultured meat between 2025 and 2040, capturing 35% of the global meat market by 2040. During the same period, they predict 9% CAGR for plant-based meats. Additionally, plant-based meat growth is front-loaded in their model, slowing rapidly and gaining less than 0.5% annually closer to 2040, for a total 25% market share. Conventional meat, in their projection, will experience negative growth, shrinking at 3% annually and dwindling to 40% of the market.
Cultured meat is still too expensive for mass appeal or budgets, but its price trajectory over the past few years shows an exponential drop as technology rapidly improves. In 2013, Professor Mark Post produced the first fully cultured hamburger for slightly more than $300,000, or $1.2 million per pound. By 2017, four years later, Memphis Meats grew chicken meat via cellular agriculture for $9,000 a pound, slashed to $1,000 per pound the following year. One year after that, in 2019, Aleph Farms managed to create lab beef for $100 per pound.
Commercial production of cultured meat appears from these figures to be on the cusp of feasibility. The first lab meats may feature on restaurant menus or perhaps specialized grocery shelves in 2020 or 2021. Simply producing the meat at an affordable price doesn't ensure its dominance over standard meat or plant-based meats, though. Lab meat still needs to prove how it stacks up against these established alternatives.
Plant-based meats and cultured meat will probably go head to head in three main areas to determine which will win the biggest market share: ethics, environmental impact, and flavor. While lab meat has strengths in each of these areas, plant-based meats have also come a long way from the limp, tasteless, poorly textured soy patties of yore. Some of lab meat's advantages might not be as large as certain analysts paint them.
When it comes to ethical considerations, it's very difficult to measure potential changes in consumer preference, especially among vegans and vegetarians. Nevertheless, plant-based meats appear to have an unassailable advantage in this area. Since they are made of plant ingredients, they are fully vegetarian and vegan. Cultured meat, on the other hand, still carries potential ethical baggage from the viewpoint of vegans.
Nevertheless, lab meat could potentially capture some of the vegan market among those less concerned with deeper ethical questions, and who simply object to killing animals. Similarly, some people who currently eat meat might switch to lab meat, preferring a "killing-free" alternative even if they'll eat standard meat in the absence of cultured substitutes. Lab meat could also potentially make market inroads in so-called "mixed" households where meat-eaters and vegans live together, helping make the "carnists'" dietary preferences less objectionable to the vegans.
According to Piplsay research, 15% of Americans have tried plant-based meat substitutes because they wanted to go vegan or vegetarian, but wanted a way to sate their meat cravings. Though nowhere near a precise analog, this statistic might give a vague clue about the minimum percent of vegans who might be expected to try lab meat.
Cultured meat advocates cite the eco-friendly nature of their product, which uses much less water and land than livestock farms while moderately reducing energy use. However, according to research carried out jointly by Impossible Foods and Quantis, plant-based meats offer practically identical environmental benefits -- though that study did not measure energy use:
