Interestingly, the job comes with a target of catching at least 100 animals per month. If the agency is unable to achieve the target, a penalty of Rs 100 per animal would be levied on the agency and if the count exceeds 100, the agency will get a “incentive” of the same amount, as per a tender floated by the UP government on March 7.
Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath feeds Jaggery to cows and calves at Gaushala.
NEW DELHI: Uttar Pradesh’s stray cattle problem has become a menace on the country’s longest 302-km-long Agra-Lucknow Expressway too, causing lots of fatal accidents , and has now led the Yogi Adityanath government to take an unusual step.
The state government is now hiring a private agency to catch cows on the expressway and Rs 2,000 per cattle would be paid for the same. Interestingly, the job comes with a target of catching at least 100 animals per month. If the agency is unable to achieve the target, a penalty of Rs 100 per animal would be levied on the agency and if the count exceeds 100, the agency will get a “incentive” of the same amount, as per a tender floated by the UP government on March 7. The cattle will have to be handed over by the agency promptly to the nearest animal shelter homes.
It was earlier reported that between August 20, 2017 and December 31, 2018, 191 people had died on the expressway which saw nearly 2,000 accidents. It is not clear how many of them were caused by stray animals.
A study was also marked by the UP government on this. “It has been observed over the period of time that the crash barriers/fences installed along the Agra-Lucknow expressway have been breached by the local habitats leading to unauthorised entry to the expressway. Besides this, these passages have become easy entry for the cattle on the Expressway leading to major accidents. This has become a major cause of heavy loss of invaluable human life through frequent vehicular accidents,” the tender document accessed by ET says.
The cattle-catching teams will work in five groups in each shift and will monitor and preventing trespassing, encroachments and entry of animals on the Expressway. The teams deployed for catching stray animals shall ensure that no hazard is posed to traffic due to their operation, it has been specified. The agency will have loudspeakers and mikes to warn speeding vehicles of the cattle-catching exercise in two shifts daily. The Agency shall ensure that all the vehicles should cover a distance of about 150 km in one round of the Expressway package in every shift, the tender document adds. All the vehicles will also have GPS kits.
