By adding Performance Livestock Analytics to its portfolio, Zoetis will now have the ability to accelerate progress in precision livestock farming and improve sustainability of a producer's operation.
An Iowa-based technology company, Performance Livestock Analytics simplifies data and analytics and was the first to offer cloud-based data management to beef producers. Today, its Performance Beef solution combines cloud-based technology with automated on-farm data collection to provide powerful analytics that help feedlot managers make better decisions across financials, nutrition, and animal health. Because the solution helps simplify decisions across an entire herd, making changes to rations; creating accurate invoices and closeout reports; and analyzing trends in feed efficiencies, costs, and performance are made easy. The solution also enables users to capture new animal health inputs automatically at the chute, providing insights into individual animal performance and health protocol compliance.
In addition, Cattle Krush, a complementary tool to Performance Beef, uses real-time market data to give producers instant breakeven, market analytics, and profit alerts to help in buying and selling cattle.
“The addition of Performance Livestock Analytics is an important part of our strategy to bring precision livestock farming to our customers to help improve the health of their animals and the sustainability of their operations,” says Mike McFarland, DVM, DABVP, executive vice president and group president of accelerated growth businesses for Zoetis. “The team at Performance Livestock Analytics has successfully applied Silicon Valley technology learnings to the needs of livestock producers, and we are thrilled to have them join us at Zoetis to continue leading the way in digital and data analytics for livestock.”
“Our digital platform changes how livestock producers manage their business. Real-time, accurate data allows producers to make better management decisions to help boost efficiency and profitability,” says Dane Kuper, cofounder and CEO, Performance Livestock Analytics. “Both our culture and vision align well with Zoetis. Now, as part of Zoetis, we will be better positioned to provide practical technology solutions to improve livestock health and sustainability for our customers.”
The financial terms of the acquisition are not being disclosed.
