Home / News / Top /Global Rare Metals Market Overview, Development History and Forecast to 2026 shared in Latest Research
Global Rare Metals Market Overview, Development History and Forecast to 2026 shared in Latest Research
A rare-earth element (REE) or rare-earth metal (REM), as defined by IUPAC, is one of a set of seventeen chemical elements in the periodic table, specifically the fifteen lanthanides, as well as scandium and yttrium. Scandium and yttrium are considered rare-earth elements because they tend to occur in the same ore deposits as the lanthanides and exhibit similar chemical properties. For the same set of mineralogical, chemical, physical (especially electron shell configuration), and related reasons, a broader definition of rare earth elements including the actinides is encountered in some cases. Thorium is a significant component of monazite and other important rare earth minerals, and uranium and decay products are found in others. Both series of elements begin on the periodic table in group 3 under yttrium and scandium.
Growing demand for magnets in automobiles, and energy generation will majorly contribute to the growth of global rare earth metals market over the forecast period. The demand for rare earth magnets is majorly increasing by their consumption in electric and hybrid vehicles, and wind turbines. Increasing focus on utilizing clean and renewable energy is giving a substantial pressure on the electricity providers, to generate energy through renewable sources, which in turn will show a positive impact on the growth of this market.
The global Rare Metals market is valued at 10160 million US$ in 2020 is expected to reach 17600 million US$ by the end of 2026, growing at a CAGR of 8.2% during 2021-2026.
Access more details about this report at: https://www.themarketreports.com/report/global-rare-metals-market-research-report
(This is our latest offering and this report also analyzes the impact of COVID-19 on Rare Metals market and updated by the current situation, especially the forecast)
The research report has incorporated the analysis of different factors that augment the market’s growth. It constitutes trends, restraints, and drivers that transform the market in either a positive or negative manner. This section also provides the scope of different segments and applications that can potentially influence the market in the future. The detailed information is based on current trends and historic milestones. This section also provides an analysis of the volume of production about the global market and also about each type from 2015 to 2026. This section mentions the volume of production by region from 2015 to 2026. Pricing analysis is included in the report according to each type from the year 2015 to 2026, manufacturer from 2015 to 2020, region from 2015 to 2020, and global price from 2015 to 2026.
A thorough evaluation of the restrains included in the report portrays the contrast to drivers and gives room for strategic planning. Factors that overshadow the market growth are pivotal as they can be understood to devise different bends for getting hold of the lucrative opportunities that are present in the ever-growing market. Additionally, insights into market expert’s opinions have been taken to understand the market better.
The major players in the market include Iluka Resources Limited, Lynas Corporation, Ltd., Greenland Minerals and Energy Ltd., Northern Minerals Limited, Alkane Resources Ltd, Rising Nonferrous Metals Co., Ltd, Arafura Resources Ltd., Canada Rare Earth Corporation, China Minmetals Rare Earth Co., Ltd, Indian Rare Earths Limited, Neo Performance Materials Inc., Avalon Rare Metals, Great Western Minerals Group Ltd., etc.
Purchase this exclusive research report at: https://www.themarketreports.com/report/buy-now/1417632
The report offers in-depth assessment of the growth and other aspects of the Rare Metals market in important regions, including the U.S., Canada, Germany, France, U.K., Italy, Russia, China, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Southeast Asia, Mexico, and Brazil, etc. Key regions covered in the report are North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific and Latin America.
The report has been curated after observing and studying various factors that determine regional growth such as economic, environmental, social, technological, and political status of the particular region. Analysts have studied the data of revenue, production, and manufacturers of each region. This section analyses region-wise revenue and volume for the forecast period of 2015 to 2026. These analyses will help the reader to understand the potential worth of investment in a particular region.
This section of the report identifies various key manufacturers of the market. It helps the reader understand the strategies and collaborations that players are focusing on combat competition in the market. The comprehensive report provides a significant microscopic look at the market. The reader can identify the footprints of the manufacturers by knowing about the global revenue of manufacturers, the global price of manufacturers, and production by manufacturers during the forecast period of 2015 to 2019.
Inquire for more details / sample / customization about this report at: https://www.themarketreports.com/report/ask-your-query/1417632
