Allen Sykora Thursday May 21, 2020 12:23
Editor's Note: With so much market volatility, stay on top of daily news! Get caught up in minutes with our speedy summary of today's must-read news and expert opinions. Sign up here!
( Kitco News ) - With silver seemingly “undervalued” and the reopening of economies expected to boost  industrial demand, traders are looking for the gold-silver ratio to continue  its decline as silver continues its recent outperformance.
The view is not unanimous,  however, as some traders worry that renewed trade tensions between the U.S. and  China could dent industrial demand for silver.
The gold-silver ratio  measures how many ounces of silver it takes to buy an ounce of gold, with a  rising  number meaning an  underperformance by silver compared to gold, and vice-versa. Back in March, the  ratio rose as high as 127.
However, just before noon  Thursday, the ratio was just under 102 and it was even lower earlier this week.  Spot gold was trading at $1,718 an ounce, while silver was at $16.86.
“If I came into these markets and I open up an account with an  intention of putting on [a long position in] gold, and then looked at the price  of silver, I would buy silver,” said Bob Haberkorn, senior  commodities broker with RJO Futures, predicting the metal will hit $20 in a few weeks. “People who were looking to trade gold are now going to turn  their head to silver.”
Charlie Nedoss, senior market strategist with LaSalle Futures  Group, said the  relationship between gold and silver “has been out of line for  some time.” Earlier this week, Commerzbank analysts commented that the ratio  peaked at 85 during the 2008 financial crisis and that the longer-term average  was in the 60s.
“Silver was the laggard,” Nedoss said of the activity during  the last couple of months. “I think silver is starting  to catch up, but I think there is more room to go.
Nedoss said that he is “friendly” to both commodities. However, like others, he  commented that industrial demand should improve as economies start to open up.
“Of commodities overall, silver stands out as one undervalued  given the circumstances,” Haberkorn said. “There are a lot of people out there who have been buying gold  since this [COVID-19] crisis has been unfolding, [but] buying silver here and  there. At this point, with gold above $1,700 an ounce and silver so low, a lot  of investors are taking a second look at silver.”
Both gold and silver sold  off with all markets back in mid-March when equities were getting hammered and  investors needed to raise cash, he explained. However, silver has not been able  to snap back as quickly as gold.
“People say silver has industrial uses and the demand isn’t  there,” Haberkorn said. “Of course, it has industrial  use and it has always had industrial use. But it also has always been a  flight-to-safety asset, and it has been throughout history. Silver is pretty  low down here below $20 an ounce while gold is around $1,700 an ounce. So I  think people are starting to look for silver to make an aggressive move  shortly.”
George Gero, managing director with RBC Wealth Management, looks for the ratio to come  down to the 90s or even high 80s, although he said there could be a delay due  to volatility around expiration of options next week.
“Silver is going to perform a little bit better than it has,” Gero  said. “Silver was held back because  of its industrial component. Now, with the reopening of many of the economies,  the industrial component is a tailwind instead of a headwind.”
Meanwhile, Phillip Streible,  chief market strategist with Blue Line Futures, worries that renewed U.S.-China tensions could  stall the rally that has occurred in silver and other industrially oriented  metals lately, thus he looks for another uptick in the gold-silver ratio.
“I believe if there is any validity to [U.S.] President Trump  and China butting heads on current trade policy, we might see silver prices  back off a bit from here,” Streible said. “Fifty percent of silver’s demand is industrial demand, at  least. It has been tracking copper, platinum and palladium higher.”
Traders will be watching  U.S. and Chinese economic data, as well as whether equities top out around  their recent highs.
“I definitely think if you’ve been long in silver for a while,  you might want to take a little bit off,” Streible  said.
Conversely, trade tensions  could help gold, since this metal tends to fare better whenever there is any  kind of geopolitical flare-ups, Streible said.
“People would liquidate other risk assets and go into gold,” he  said. “I am a more a firm believer  in gold. The gold/silver ratio has come off quite a bit. It dipped below 100.  Now, it could bounce back up.”
