Gold futures gave up earlier gains to finish lower on Friday, but posted their fourth weekly gain in five weeks as investors weighed demand for the haven metal against a backdrop of muted trading in U.S. government bond yields, a more stable consumer sentiment reading and mixed trading in the stock market.
Prices saw “a normal trading pullback after encountering technical resistance near $1,740,” said Colin Cieszynski, chief market strategist at SIA Wealth Management. “Volumes have dropped off as well, suggesting this is just normal backing and filling with bulls taking a day off after two days [of gains] or running up on higher volumes, he told MarketWatch.
U.S. economic data Friday failed to provide a lift to gold prices. Orders for durable goods sank 14.4% in March.The steep drop in bookings last month was the second biggest ever since the government began keeping track in the early 1990s.
Consumer sentiment, however, appeared to stabilize toward the end of April following the biggest decline ever. The final reading of the consumer sentiment survey in April edged up to 71.8 from an initial 71, the University of Michigan said Friday.
Some “optimism over the economy has resulted in gold prices correcting,” said Chintan Karnani, chief market analyst at Insignia Consultants. “The current fall in gold price is just a correction” but if it continues till Tuesday, “will result in a short term bearish phase.”
Gold for June delivery US:GCM20 on Comex fell by $9.80, or 0.6%, to settle at $1,735.60 an ounce. For the week, the yellow metal saw a roughly 2.2% gain, which marked its fourth weekly rise in five weeks, according to FactSet data. Prices settled Thursday at their highest since April 14.
Commodity experts have said that measures by global central banks, including the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank, to limit the economic harm from the COVID-19 pandemic, have been supportive of higher prices for precious metals.
“In this new world in which both the ECB and the Fed continue to unleash new stimulus packages, dramatically increasing the liquidity of cash, combined with a lot of uncertainty, gold will remain in high demand and playing a key role in any investor’s portfolio," wrote Carlo Alberto De Casa, chief analyst at ActivTrades in a Friday research note.
Meanwhile, the European Union support package “continues to be delayed by political differences,” analysts at Zaner Metals wrote in a daily note. EU leaders signed off on an already-agreed €500 billion ($542.15 billion) coronavirus response, but failed to make headway on a longer-term recovery plan that could reach a trillion dollars, according to a report in The Wall Street Journal .
President Donald Trump, however, signed into law a $484 billion bill Friday to replenish coronavirus aid program for small businesses.
Prices for gold saw earlier support on the back of muted government bond yields, which compete with bullion for haven flows. The 10-year Treasury yield TMUBMUSD10Y,
, for example, was around 0.60% in Friday dealings, down from 0.67% at the same point last week. Bond yields fall as prices rise.
“From a classic physical demand perspective, the gold market is likely to be negatively impacted next week by the lockdown in India as that will likely prevent gold purchases on the [second] most culturally auspicious buying day of the year,” said analysts at Zaner Metals. Sunday is Akshaya Tritiya, a holy day for Hindus.
The Zaner analysts also said that there are reports that several mining companies are planning to restart mining operations in the coming weeks, which would ease supply concerns.
Elsewhere on Comex, May silver US:SIK20, meanwhile, lost 9.4 cents, or 0.6%, to $15.263 an ounce, for a weekly loss of 0.2%.
May copper US:HGK20 settled at $2.337 a pound, up 1.1% Friday, but registering a weekly loss of 0.3%. July platinum PLN20,
