Gold prices traded slightly higher on Wednesday, as the precious metal tried to rebound after settling at a three-week low.
The climb for the precious metal came despite some factors that would usually put pressure on haven gold, such as upbeat economic data.
The Institute for Supply Management said Wednesday that its index of service-oriented companies such as hospitals, retailers and restaurants rose to a six-month high of 55.5% last month.
Separately, private-sector employment surged 291,000 in January, Automatic Data Processing Inc. reported Wednesday. The gain was well above market forecasts and marked the largest increase since May 2015.
Traders, however, are looking ahead, and may expect to see job losses in certain sectors and “in almost every Asian nation due to the coronavirus” in February, said Chintan Karnani, chief market analyst at Insignia Consultants. “Traders are just pricing in the slowdown and job losses world-wide.”
Gold for April delivery US:GCJ20 on Comex was up $4.40, or 0.3%, at $1,559.90 an ounce, after tumbling 1.7% Tuesday to mark the lowest settlement for a most-active contract since Jan. 16, according to FactSet data.
“While anything is possible in terms of price movement in the short run, I don’t see dip-buying behavior changing any time soon” for gold, Michael Armbruster, managing partner at Altavest, told MarketWatch.
March silver US:SIH20 added 4.9 cents, or 0.3%, to trade at $17.61 an ounce, after it skidded 0.6% lower on Tuesday.
Precious metals contended with a number of other headwinds as they stepped higher, including those from a stronger dollar, rising government bond yields and a buoyant global equity market, which was climbing on the back of unconfirmed reports of treatments for an Asian viral outbreak.
Researchers at Zhejiang University said they found an effective drug to treat coronavirus patients, according to a Chinese newspaper. Separately, a team of U.K. scientists claimed progress toward a vaccine.
Still, the World Health Organization has said that there are “no known effective therapeutics” against the virus, in response to the media reports
Fears that the virus could at least temporarily damage China’s economy had helped to lift gold prices but gains were unwound as assets perceived as risky have climbed in recent trade, including the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
