Gold futures settled with a loss on Friday but still scored the biggest weekly rise in more than 11 years in a rebound fueled in part by a weaker U.S. dollar and concerns about disruptions in the physical market for the precious metal.
Volatility for gold is likely to “continue in both directions,” said Rob Haworth, senior investment strategist at U.S. Bank Wealth Management.
“With global central banks ramping their balance sheets to global financial crisis levels and beyond, there is ample liquidity and very low real interest rates to drive gold prices higher,” he said in recent comments to MarketWatch.
“However, the contraction in global economic activity and stress in business and consumer balance sheets are straining U.S. dollar funding markets, a negative for gold prices and investors,” he said. “As investors continue to react to growing social distancing policies, risks are likely downside biased for gold investors. As we see social distancing policies stabilize or recede gold prices could improve, supported by ample global liquidity.”
Gold for April delivery US:GCJ20 on Comex fell  $26.20, or 1.6%, to settle at $1,625 an ounce. For the week, prices for the most-active contract rose 9.5%, which marked the biggest weekly rise since September 2008, according to FactSet.
May silver US:SIK20 dropped 14.2 cents, or 1.%, to $14.534 an ounce, for a weekly climb of more than 17% — the largest weekly rise since April 1987.
Part of gold’s weekly advance is “explained by the thinning physical supply as refineries slowed or ceased activity due to the coronavirus shutdowns,” said Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at Swissquote Bank, in a note.
“But the latter caused liquidity issues across the gold markets, leaving traders wondering if the yellow metal offered the right protection through the shaky waters,” Ozkardeskaya said.
A retreat by the U.S. dollar Thursday after last week’s surge was a positive for gold. A weaker dollar can be supportive for commodities priced in the unit, making them cheaper to users of other currencies. After surging last week amid a global scramble for dollars, the greenback retreated this week, with the ICE U.S. Dollar Index DXY,
off nearly 4%, on track for its biggest one-week drop since 2009.
Downbeat U.S. economic data Friday failed to provide support for haven gold. The final results for U.S. consumer sentiment index fell to 89.1 in March from a preliminary 95.9 and 101.0 in the prior month, according to the University of Michigan.
Among other metals traded on Comex Friday, May copper US:HGK20 shed 0.3% to $2.172 a pound, with prices ending little changed for the week.
April platinum US:PLJ20 added 0.4% to $740.30 an ounce, for a weekly climb of nearly 19%. June palladium US:PAM20 settled at $2,196.80 an ounce, down 1.3% Friday, but notching a weekly jump of more than 42%. Mine shutdowns to slow the spread of COVID-19 in South Africa and Russia have raised expectations for tighter supplies of the platinum group metals.
Russia’s Norilsk is “the world’s largest producer of palladium; conditions have already tightened due to shipment issues and are likely to tighten further,” said Rhona O’Connell, head of market analysis, EMEA and Asia regions at INTL FCStone, in a note.
“With South African producers needing to suspend production for three weeks in the ﬁrst instance, supply disruption will be much more of a key driver [for the platinum group metals sector] than for gold,” she said.
Wearing a mask has become a uniquely hot-button issue in the U.S., which finds itself in the throes of viral pandemic that appears to be drifting out of control by the day.
