Neils Christensen Sunday June 07, 2020 21:50
( Kitco News )  - The gold market is seeing  some stability at the start of the new trading week as prices try to recover  from Friday's roughly 3% selloff.
August gold futures  last traded at $1,689.50 an ounce, up 0.39% on the day.
The precious metal  took a significant hit Friday. It saw a substantial break below critical  support at $1,700 an ounce after employment data showed that the U.S. economy  created 2.5 million jobs in May. The data were a massive surprise as economists  were expecting to see job losses of 7.5 million.
Although some  investors see Friday's drop as a buying opportunity, analysts are warning that  prices could continue to fall as equity markets and bond yields continue to  move higher.
Given Friday's  selloff, many analysts are expecting gold prices to test the next major support  area between $1,645 and $1,650 an ounce.
"Our base case  is that the yellow metal is in a $50 range on both sides of $1700. It frayed  the upper end in mid-May, but it has now fallen for three consecutive weeks and  finished last week at six-week lows. There is little to hang one's hat on until  the $1650 area," said Marc Chandler, chief market strategist at  Bannockburn Global Forex in a note Sunday.
Chandler added that  momentum indicators continue to point to lower prices in gold in the near-term.  He also said that gold's correlation to equities has turned negative as  risks-off sentiment flows through financial markets.
In a report  published Saturday, Nick Cawley, strategist at DailyFX.com, said that he is  also watching $1,645 level for gold. He added that bond yields and resilient  strength in the U.S. dollar could dull the precious metal's luster.
"Gold has been  a major beneficiary of a weak dollar and low U.S. interest rates over the last  three weeks and this looks likely to change in the short-term. The yield on the  10-year U.S. benchmark is nearing 1%, up from 0.65% a week ago, dulling the  appeal of the precious metal, while the U.S. dollar basket may have found a  temporary base around 96.50 after having fallen by four big figures since  mid-May," he said.
However, Cawley  added that there is enough market uncertainty to support gold's long-term  uptrend.
"Relations  between the U.S. and China continue to sour and look set to get worse… while  the economic impact of the COVID-19 virus will be felt for years to come. These  market negatives are not expected to disappear any time soon and will underpin  gold in the weeks and months ahead," he said.
Martin Murenbeeld,  president of Murenbeeld & Co., is also looking past gold's selloff Friday.  Despite the significantly better-than-expected employment report, he said that  nothing has radically changed for the economy.
"No central bank will reduce its stimulus on  account of these first signs of economic bottoming," he said.  "Second, no government is even remotely thinking of pulling back on its  fiscal stimulus, regardless of how good the economic data might be in the  coming months," he said. "In short, the good news for gold is that  monetary and fiscal stimulus will carry on regardless of the state of the  economy for the rest of this year and next. This then sets up the possibility  that inflation will finally pick up one or two years hence."
