Gold futures gave up earlier gains to finish lower on Thursday, as some upbeat U.S. economic data dulled haven demand for the precious metal.
Prices also declined on the back of further gains in U.S. benchmark stock indexes, which followed the completion Wednesday of the first stage in a trade pact between the U.S. and China and the Senate approval of the U.S.-Mexico-Canada trade agreement on Thursday.
“Gold prices gave up their earlier gains following a wrath of positive US economic data,” said Edward Moya, senior market analyst at Oanda, in a market update. “This week has not been good for macro-economic traders looking to make a bullish case for gold prices.”
The Philadelphia Fed said Thursday its gauge of business activity in its region surged in January. New jobless claims fell for the fifth week in a row and retail sales increased 0.3% last month, the government said Thursday. Meanwhile, the National Association of Home Builders’ monthly confidence index dropped one point to 75 in January from 76 the month prior.
Despite the mostly upbeat economic data, “the longer-term bullish trend for gold has been supported on central bank demand, geopolitical risks, trade tensions and a falling dollar,” said Moya.
Gold for February delivery US:GCG20 on Comex declined by $3.50, or 0.2%, to settle at $1,550.50 an ounce, trading between a low of $1,548 and high of $1,558.20. Prices settled 0.6% higher a day earlier.
March silver US:SIH20, meanwhile, shed 4.9 cents, or 0.3%, at $17.939 an ounce, after rising 1.4% on Wednesday.
The move for gold comes as the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
broke through a 1000-point milestone at 29,000 recently representing a record run for the broader stock market that has been at least partially fueled by Wednesday’s signing of the initial part of multi-level trade agreement between the U.S. and China.
Commodities experts, however, say that gold has found some support from a weaker U.S. dollar and benchmark government bond yields which look to end the week lower, providing a runway for gold to produce a modest rise above a level at $1,550 considered support for the yellow metal.
“The recovery to this threshold is positive for gold, as it’s showing a healthy appetite for bullion, despite the general risk-on scenario which has followed the signing of the Phase One deal between US and China,” wrote Carlo Alberto De Casa, chief analyst at ActivTrades in a daily research note.
On Thursday, yields for the 10-year benchmark note TMUBMUSD10Y,
