Gold’s price has swung 4.4% in this week’s trade, on a peak-to-trough basis
Gold futures ended higher Friday, finding support from weaker-than-expected monthly U.S. jobs data to score a third weekly climb, even as easing tensions in Middle East worked to dull haven demand for the precious metal.
Gold had climbed past the “psychological $1,550 level as immediate reaction to the underwhelming December US nonfarm payrolls,” Han Tan, market analyst at FXTM, told MarketWatch. However, “bullion bulls are struggling to find cause for a sustained liftoff back to $1600 after the US and Iran appeared to walk away from the brink of an all-out conflict earlier this week.”
February gold US:GCG20 on Comex tacked on $5.80, or 0.4%, to settle at $1,560.10 an ounce. Prices had climbed to as high as $1,613.30 on an intraday basis Wednesday, the highest since 2013.
For the week, the most-active gold futures contract gained about 0.5%, which marked their third weekly rise in a row, but perhaps more telling is gold’s nearly 4.4% peak-to-trough move over the week.
The backsliding in the precious commodity and jump in stocks over the five-session stretch follows a lessening of Middle East tensions that has restored risk appetite and produced a major drag on precious metals.
On Wednesday President Donald Trump delivered remarks that underscored a move toward peace after a late-Tuesday Iranian airstrike on U.S. air bases in Iraq in an apparent retaliation for the killing of Iranian Maj. Gen. Qassem Soleimani a week ago. Separately, A Chinese envoy is set to go to Washington on Monday through Wednesday to firm up a phase-one trade agreement.
“The abruptness of the heightened US-Iran conflict over the past week...shows that investors cannot fully rule out heightened geopolitical risks, and such a sense of caution should keep Bullion relatively elevated above its 50- and 100-day moving averages, which currently reside in the high $1,400s,” said Tan.
Meanwhile, equity markets , which often move in the opposite direction of gold, were mixed, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
