Jordan Roy-Byrne Wednesday July 01, 2020 10:03
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
Gold has broken out from a two-month-long  consolidation (from $1680 to $1770), but the other precious metals markets have  not confirmed Gold's strength.
The gold stocks (GDX, GDXJ) remain below their  May highs while Silver remains below significant, multi-year resistance around  $18.75. Silver closed Monday at $18.06.
Furthermore, Gold, when priced against foreign  currencies, has not broken out. This move has been driven mostly by dollar  weakness.
It is possible other markets could follow Gold  higher, but there is work to be done.
Moreover, the breakouts in GDXJ and Silver  would be far more significant for the sector.
GDXJ is close to a fresh 7-year high while  Silver is close to a new 4-year high.
In addition to the above, we should note  Gold's resistance at $1800, where Gold tried and failed three times (in late  2011 and 2012) to reclaim $1900. Gold closed Monday at $1781.
Upon reviewing Gold, Silver, and GDXJ, we can  see that no real sector breakout has occurred yet.
The trend is higher throughout the sector, and  the fundamentals are strong, but we should temper our immediate expectations  for the entire sector.
That does not mean sell or hedge. It just  means adjusting expectations until the market gives us a signal either way.
The senior producers are currently lagging,  but the juniors (GDXJ) and explorers (GOEX) are performing best. I expect that  to continue during and following the next breakout, whenever it comes.
Regardless of where things move, this remains  an excellent time to get into quality juniors with the most upside potential.  Once the sector breaks higher, many stocks will no longer be cheap.
We continue to focus on identifying and  accumulating those stocks with significant upside potential over the next 12 to  24 months. To learn the stocks we own and intend to buy that have 3x to 5x  potential, consider learning more about our premium service.
