Gold down a second session as the dollar strengthens following a jump in U.S. jobless claims
Gold futures gave up earlier gains to end lower on Thursday, pressured as the U.S. dollar strengthened in the wake of a surge in weekly U.S. jobless claims, which underlined the rapid deterioration in the economy from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The U.S. Labor Department on Thursday reported that 5.25 million workers who lost jobs applied for unemployment benefits last week, driving the number of coronavirus-related layoffs above 21 million in just one month.
“U.S. economic data covering the past few weeks is showing just how much damage has been inflicted on U.S. businesses,” said Jim Wyckoff, senior analyst at Kitco.com, in a daily note.
Also on Thursday, U.S. data showed that the Philadelphia Fed manufacturing index in April dropped to -56.6, the lowest reading since July 1980 and builders started construction on new homes at a pace of 1.22 million in March—a 22% decline from a revised 1.56 million in February.
Downbeat data reinforced the perception that the U.S. economy is weakening at an unprecedented clip, likely setting the stage for a slow and long recovery, referred to as U-shaped. Against that backdrop, investors looked to the U.S. dollar as a haven, lifting the ICE U.S. Dollar Index DXY,
by 0.6% in Thursday dealings.
“The U.S. dollar has been attracting safe haven investment across the globe,” said James Hatzigiannis, chief market strategist at Ploutus Capital Advisors. “The increase of strength in the U.S. dollar drives gold prices down.”
“In addition, the heightened amounts of volatility in the markets has caused an increase in demand of cash and liquidity (to cover margin and readjust portfolios) for investors and that hurts gold,” he told MarketWatch.
Gold for June delivery US:GCM20 on Comex fell by $8.50, or 0.5%, to settle at $1,731.70 an ounce after touching an earlier high of $1,768. Prices finished at the lowest level for a most-active contract since April 8, according to FactSet data. Wednesday’s loss of 1.6% halted a four-session string of gains.
Elsewhere in Comex, the most-active May contract for silver US:SIK20 picked up 11.7 cents, or nearly 0.8%, at $15.622 an ounce, after sinking 3.9% in the prior session. May copper US:HGK20 shed 0.2% to $2.291 a pound.
declined by 1.4% to $793.30 an ounce and June palladium US:PAM20 lost 1.5% to end at $2,120.70 an ounce.
Gold mostly held its ground above $1,700, a significant level that commodity investors expect the precious metal to hover near as global central banks and governments world-wide work to avert a deep global recession.
“There are a lot of things to like about gold right now,” said Hatzigiannis, pointing to the combination of central banks claiming to be “all in” on whatever monetary policy moves are called for, and a decrease in production amid mining operation shutdowns tied to COVID-19.
Near limitless monetary stimulus by the Federal Reserve to alleviate liquidity and credit pressures in the financial markets and trillions of dollars of  federal government support to help businesses and workers also are viewed as supportive of gold buying.
Read: Gold may soon soar to a record $2,000 says analyst: we ‘borrowed from the future, and there is not enough economy to pay it down’
Hatzigiannis said he’s bullish on gold in the long term, with prices potentially testing the $1,800 level in the next month or so, but also thinks gold may be “coming close to over-bought levels” in the short term.
Meanwhile, assets considered risky, like stocks, have gained some altitude on the prospects of reopening the U.S. economy soon. U.S. benchmark stock indexes traded on a mixed note in Thursday dealings , with the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
down nearly 100 points as gold futures settled.
Our call of the day has charted out some highs and lows for the S&P 500 that investors need to watch out for in coming weeks and months. And here’s what could cause a trigger.
