Gold lost ground Tuesday, under pressure for a second straight session and eyeing its lowest finish in nearly two weeks, as worries about the economic impact of China’s spreading coronavirus continued to ebb.
“Investor concern about the coronavirus outbreak has faded a bit,” said Colin Cieszynski, chief market strategist at SIA Wealth Management. “Between the PBOC stepping up and rumou=rs of OPEC+ thinking about (oil) production cuts, investors appear to be counting on governments or central banks stepping in to cushion any economic impact from the outbreak and not let the situation spiral out of control unchecked.”
“So currently, it looks like capital inflows into defensive havens have slowed and with gold coming back down—could even be reversing course” he told MarketWatch. However, “if the situation in China were to take a turn for the worse, or if the number of cases outside of China were to ramp up significantly, gold could potentially attract interest once again.”
In Tuesday dealings, gold for April delivery US:GCJ20 on Comex fell $25.70, or 1.6%, to $1,556.70 an ounce, with prices for the most-active contract poised to settled at its lowest since Jan. 22. March silver US:SIH20 was down 9.5 cents, or 0.5%, at $17.575 an ounce.
The yellow metal lost ground Monday as U.S. stocks took back a chunk of the steep selloff triggered at the end of last week by fears over the spread of the coronavirus. The rebound robbed gold of the haven appeal that had rallied the metal late last week and early Monday, when it re-approached the $1,600-an-ounce level before turning south.
“The headwind the last two days is U.S. dollar strength as well as possibility of U.S. FOMC lowering rates to in next few months (March or June meeting), which has led to recovery in U.S. equity markets from last weeks sell off,” Jeff Wright, executive vice president of GoldMining Inc., told MarketWatch.
“The risk-on trade is working for most fund managers right now,” he said. “Safe haven interest [in gold] is waning.”
An upbeat reading of the January Institute for Supply Management manufacturing index for the U.S. released Monday, and a 1.8% rise in December factory orders reported Tuesday soothed investor jitters, and helped to dull haven demand for gold.
U.S. benchmark stock indexes climbed in Tuesday trading, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
up more than 430 points, or 1.5%.
In other metals trade, April platinum US:PLJ20 was off 0.9% at $961.70 an ounce, while March palladium US:PAH20 rose 3.5% to $2,312.60 an ounce. March copper US:HGH20 rose 1.3% to $2.5395 a pound after settling Monday at its lowest since May 2017.
In a year where a classic 60/40 allocation has showed its value, JP Morgan is joining the line of Wall Street banks that are calling the demise of the traditional portfolio.
