Phillip Streible Friday April 24, 2020 13:36
Featuring views and opinions written by market professionals, not staff journalists.
As the  legendary trader Jesse Livermore once said, “There is nothing new in wall  street. There can’t be because speculation is as old as the hills. Whatever  happens in the stock market today has happened before and will happen again.”
There  couldn’t be a more accurate statement as the one above and I believe a set up  that I have seen before is taking place in the gold market right now.
I had to  dig out my old notes from working at Lind-Waldock and analyze some of the rare  developments around 2008-2009 that are quite similar to today. Many will argue  that back then it was a financial crisis and what we are facing today is a  virus, however I have noticed very similar technical coincidences which could  help lead us to try and predict the future price of gold.
The Chart  Below is the front month gold futures from mid 2008 on up to the peak in August  2011. Now the three arrows in the bottom right are what I want you to focus on.  The first blue UP arrow was the day that Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy.  On that date, September gold hit a low of $739 and the flight to safety began.  At this point, I had thought that the coast was clear and it was smooth sailing  to higher gold prices, but what actually happened less than one month later  (the Blue DOWN arrow) was that a key reversal occurred with a peak of $936 on  October 10th and we closed that day on the low at $859.
This was  because margin calls fully hit the equity markets wide spread and traders sold  anything of value in their portfolios much like we saw on March 9th 2020 where  gold made a recent peak at $1707 and sold off for eight straight days taking it  down to $1453 from margin liquidations.
Once that  “fire sale” liquidation was over, stabilization began to occur,  (the  Green UP arrow) when the Federal Reserve stepped in and provided unprecedented  levels of liquidity and monetary stimulus as we see today. From that point  forward the stage was set for a multi year rally which is what we could see  from here
From a  trading perspective we have been using multiple strategies to try and take  advantage of the expected long term price appreciation in the precious metals  markets. We also believe that silver will benefit from this and the Gold/Silver  ratio will begin the fall because of an outpacing increase in silver prices. If  you are interested in learning more about it please feel free to register  below.
Remember there are  many factors that could affect the direction of the metals markets so be sure  to stay up to date on the developments by registering for a Free two-week trial  of the Blue Line Futures Morning Express Research Reports by clicking on the  link here: The Blue Line Express  Two-Week Free Trial Sign up
