Gold mining stocks stabilized near support Tuesday after the precious metal regained its shine amid a stockmarket pullback and the commodity's recent ability to reject the closely watched $1,700 level.
"Precious metals found some traction in the wake of a risk-off global trade in equities, official recession labeling for the U.S. economy and because of the market's capacity to reject sub-$1,700 pricing for a second day in a row," Zaner Metals analysts wrote in a research note cited by MarketWatch .
In the longer term, the Federal Reserve's commitment to providing unlimited support as the economy recovers from the coronavirus pandemic continues to place downward pressure on the U.S. dollar , helping lift demand for the yellow metal from foreign currency buyers and those seeking a hedge against rising inflation.
Below, we take a closer look at two of the world's largest gold mining companies as well as an exchange-traded fund (ETF) that holds a portfolio of firms that operate in the gold mining industry.
Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corporation ( GOLD ) is a leading gold and copper producer operating in North America, South America, Australia, and Africa. The $43.26 billion gold mining giant's bottom line grew 45.5% year over year in the first quarter on the back of rising gold prices, despite a 9% decline in total gold production. Analysts have a 12-month price target on the stock at $29.82, representing a 22% premium from Tuesday's $24.38 close. As of June 10, 2020, Barrick Gold shares offer a 1.19% dividend yield and are trading over 30% higher on the year.
In recent sessions, bullion bulls have defended $22.50, where the stock finds a confluence of support from the 2016 high, the February swing high, and 50-day simple moving average (SMA). Before entering, traders may decide to wait for the moving average converge divergence (MACD) indicator to generate a buy signal by crossing above its trigger line. Those who buy at current levels should set a profit target near multi-year resistance at $39 but cut losses if the stock fails to hold above the June low at $22.13.
Newmont Corporation ( NEM ) produces and markets gold, copper, silver, zinc, and lead globally. Although the 104-year-old gold mining firm's first quarter adjusted earnings fell slightly short of Wall Street expectations, the figure jumped 43% compared to the year-ago quarter thanks to a 20% increase in attributable gold production and robust gold prices. Trading at $57.17, with a market capitalization of $45.88 billion and a 1.8% dividend yield, the stock has climbed 32.47% year to date, outperforming the gold miners industry average over the same period by around 15% as of June 10, 2020.
Newmont shares provide a " buy the dip " opportunity after finding crucial support at $52.50 – an area on the chart that lines up close to the 50% Fibonacci retracement level stretched from the March low to the May high. Swing traders who buy here should anticipate a runup to the 52-week high at $68.84 while managing downside risk with a stop-loss order placed beneath last week's low at $52.33.
Traders can gain diversified exposure to gold mining companies by purchasing the VanEck Vectors Gold Miners ETF ( GDX ), which holds a basket of about 50 firms involved in the global gold mining industry. Trading wise, more than 35 million shares exchange hand per day on an average penny spread , making the ETF suitable for a wide variety of strategies . GDX commands an enormous asset base of nearly $15 billion, issues a 0.56% dividend yield, and has returned 47.57% so far this year as of June 10, 2020. The fund carries a competitive 0.53% management fee.
Over the past three weeks, the ETF's price has pulled back to the $31 level, where it encounters significant support from the top trendline of a previous trading range that formed before the pandemic sell-off. Furthermore, the relative strength index (RSI) sits below 50, giving the fund ample room to move higher before consolidating. Those who open a long position should consider using the 50-day SMA as a trailing stop to let profits run as far as possible. Protect capital with an initial stop placed just below $31.
