Gold ends with a modest gain, then edges lower after FOMC meeting minutes
Gold futures ended slightly higher following a choppy trading session on Wednesday, failing to recoup recent losses that pulled prices down from their highest levels since 2012 earlier this week.
Prices bounced around after minutes from the Federal Reserve’s March 3 and March 15 meetings showed that Fed staff’s worst-case scenario was that an economic recovery wouldn’t take hold until next year.
The minutes showed “nothing really surprising,” said James Hatzigiannis, chief market strategist at Ploutus Capital Advisors.
There’s “still a lot of uncertainty around the coronavirus and if it has peaked yet in [the] U.S. and Europe,” he told MarketWatch. “Until we receive more clarity on the slowdown in this epidemic, we do not see the Fed making any changes to rates. Right now it seems they are on the more cautious side, as they should be, and that is a bullish fundamental case for gold.”
June gold US:GCM20 was at $1,687 an ounce in electronic trading shortly after the release of the meeting minutes. It settled at $1,684.30 an ounce on Comex Wednesday, up 60 cents, or 0.04%. May US:SIK20 settled 27.5 cents, or 1.8%, lower at $15.205 an ounce.
During Wednesday’s trading session, traders continued to monitor the news on developments tied to the COVID-19 pandemic and its drag on the global economy.
“The fundamental backdrop for the gold market remains bullish and the yellow metal has formed a solid initial support band between roughly $1,605 and $1,660 on the daily chart,” said Tyler Richey, co-editor at Sevens Report Research.
“Another sharp drop in inflation expectations as a result of the economic outlook materially deteriorating due to the negative impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic” could derail gold’s rally, he said in Wednesday’s newsletter. “Barring such a development, gold should continue higher albeit in continued volatile trading in the weeks and likely months ahead.”
Gold remains more than 2% higher for the week, and on Tuesday topped $1,700 an ounce to trade at its highest intraday level since late 2012 in what analysts described as a short squeeze. Gold then lost steam to end the day lower.
“In the last few days we have seen an acceleration of the gold price as it seems that investors are starting to realize that central banks will be forced to print a huge amount of money and put in place other ultra-expensive measures to fight the coronavirus-induced crisis,” said Carlo Alberto De Casa, chief analyst at ActivTrades, in a note.
Among other metals traded on Comex, May copper US:HGK20 shed 0.6% to $2.26 a pound. July platinum PLN20,
lost 1.5% to $733.60 an ounce, but June palladium US:PAM20 inched up by 0.04% to $2,095.20 an ounce.
