Gold ends higher after U.S. jobs report, but posts a loss for the week
Gold futures ended higher on Friday after a report on U.S. employment in March indicated that the damage from coronavirus related business shutdowns is already having a big impact on the labor market.
For the week, however, prices posted a modest decline. “Gold’s upside price bias has been restrained by the deflation scare running through financial markets,” said Michael Kosares, founder of USAGOLD.
June gold US:GCM20 on Comex rose $8, or 0.5%, to settle at $1,645.70 an ounce. It tacked on 2.9% on Thursday, marking its first gain in five sessions. The most-active contract registered a loss of 0.5% for the week, according to FactSet data.
“Investors are moving from worry over the damage the coronavirus might cause to the reality reflected in the [economic] numbers,” Kosares told MarketWatch. “Investors are taking refuge in cash and gold—not much of a surprise either under the circumstances.”
Friday’s nonfarm-payrolls report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics showed that the U.S. lost 701,000 jobs last month , representing the biggest monthly decline in 11 years and one of the largest ever, but it’s likely only a harbinger of what is ahead in coming months.
The unemployment figures far exceeded estimates from economists for job losses of 83,000, polled by MarketWatch. The unemployment rate, meanwhile, rose to 4.4% from a 50-year low of 3.5% in February. The huge increase in weekly new jobless claims reported Thursday , however, suggests the rate has actually surged to around 10%.
The grim jobs figures hardly reflect the full extent of the state of the labor market, which likely seen around 10 million people put out of work in the past few weeks alone, as personal and business activity has come to a halt in an effort to prevent the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic that has infected more than one million people world-wide.
Other data released Friday didn’t appear quite so downbeat, but Paul Ashworth, chief U.S. economist at Capital Economics said in a note that “we strongly suspect the survey is simply missing the full extent of the economic carnage currently developing.” That’s “either because survey responses were submitted earlier in the month or because many shuttered firms simply didn’t reply,” he said.
U.S. services and other non-manufacturing companies continued their growth in March, but at the slowest pace since August 2016, the Institute for Supply Management said Friday. The ISM services index was 52.5% in March after a 57.3% reading in the prior month.
Among other metals, May silver US:SIK20 lost 16 cents, or 1.1%, to $14.494 an ounce. For the week, gold’s sister metal declined by 0.3%.
May copper US:HGK20 shed 1.2% to $2.1925 a pound, with prices still up 0.9% for the week. July platinum PLN20,
lost 1.6% to $718.10 an ounce, for a weekly decline of more than 3%. June palladium US:PAM20 settled at $2,106 an ounce, down 0.7% for the session and losing just over 4% for the week.
Our call of the day has charted out some highs and lows for the S&P 500 that investors need to watch out for in coming weeks and months. And here’s what could cause a trigger.
