Gold eases back from highest level since 2013, but posts a second monthly climb
Gold settled lower Friday, pulling back from the more-than-six-year high it settled at a day earlier, but prices scored a second straight monthly climb.
The precious metal ended at its highest weekly price settlement since March 2013—entirely erasing “that spring’s ugly crash,” and gold was “pretty much the only thing to catch a bid as January ends,” said Adrian Ash, director of research at BullionVault.
“The current backdrop for gold is stereotypical of strong phases,” he told MarketWatch. “Over-priced stock markets are wobbling, global growth is slowing hard, and political uncertainty is worsening.”
Against that backdrop, gold for April delivery US:GCJ20 on Comex lost $1.30, or 0.1%, to settle at $1,587.90 an ounce. Prices for the most-active April contract saw weekly climb of 0.6%, and a rise of about 3.8% for the month, according to FactSet. The settlement level also marked the highest weekly price finish since March 2013.
March silver US:SIH20 added 2 cents, or 0.1%, to $18.012 an ounce, with most-active contract up by 0.5% for the month.
Gold’s rally was boosted this week as worries mounted over the potential global economic impact of the spread of the coronavirus. Those concerns helped burnish gold’s appeal as a haven as investors shunned risky assets, including stocks.
Gold “has been in a strong uptrend since early December, largely due to the significant monetary stimulus from central banks around the world,” said Harry G. Katica, analyst at Saut Strategy, in a note. “With a greater possibility of economic slowdown, further rate cuts may be needed as the year progresses. This would be good for gold.”
Global equity markets were under pressure Friday, but U.S. stocks had rebound on Thursday afternoon after the World Health Organization declared the outbreak a global emergency, with analysts tying the bounce to relief over the lack of a recommendation by the body to restrict travel to or trade with China. Beijing has reported nearly 9,700 cases of coronavirus , while the death toll has climbed to 213. The U.S. State Department on Friday urged Americans not to travel to China.
In other metals trade, April platinum US:PLJ20 lost 1.9% at $961.90 an ounce, with most-active contract prices down about 1.6% since the end of December, while March palladium US:PAH20 rose 0.4% to $2,224.70 an ounce, for a monthly rise of 16.5%.
March copper US:HGH20 edged down 0.3% to $2.517 a pound, for a monthly decline of about 10%.
“Certainly, the market has forged significant demand destruction price action already but given the images of empty thoroughfares, empty shopping malls and most importantly, empty major train stations the setback in Chinese copper demand is going to be significant in the months ahead,” analysts at Zaner Metals wrote in a daily report Friday.
