Gold futures gave up earlier gains to mark their lowest finish in over a week on Wednesday, despite losses in U.S. stocks, as investors await details on a U.S. fiscal stimulus plan from lawmakers to help limit the expected economic pain from the COVID-19 epidemic.
“We were less than impressed with gold’s move [higher] on Monday when the bottom fell out of the stock market, as gold barely poked above the $1,700 level and failed to meet upside technical targets,” analysts at Zaner Metals wrote in a daily note. “Perhaps central banks were selling gold to fund their government’s efforts to deal with the coronavirus.”
Gold fell on Tuesday after the stock market staged a recovery on reports that the Trump administration was working with Congress on a stimulus package, “but so far they seem to be in just a ‘talking’ phase,” they said.
President Donald Trump has called for payroll-tax relief and other measures to help businesses deal with the economic slowdown, but lawmakers in both parties expressed skepticism about such moves, which has hurt risk appetite on Wall Street after yesterday’s gains.
U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said Wednesday a robust economic stimulus won’t be able to pass Congress quickly and threw his support behind a smaller measure designed to help small businesses and workers grappling with the coronavirus outbreak.
Gold for April delivery US:GCJ20 on Comex fell by $18, or 1.1%, to settle at $1,642.30 an ounce, after falling 0.9% on Tuesday. The settlement was the lowest for a most-active contract since March 2, according to FactSet data. May silver US:SIK20 lost 17.9 cents, or 1.1%, to $16.776 an ounce, following a slid of 0.6% in the previous session.
Wednesday’s move for bullion comes a day after stocks, highlighted by the Dow Jones Industrial Average’s DJIA,
1,200-point gain, staged a sizable rebound after tumbling lower on Monday, amid the twin shocks of crashing oil prices and growing skittishness about the infectious disease that was first identified in Wuhan, Chain in December. U.S. benchmark stock indexes traded lower Wednesday as gold futures settled.
Overall, markets remain unsettled, amid the viral outbreak which could deliver significant blows to global supply chains and stoke a world-wide recession, some experts predict. That atmosphere has helped to bolster the price of precious metals, with gold rising four of the past five sessions.
“Gold struggled to exploit the risk-off mood on Wednesday, with prices sinking back below $1650,” said Lukman Otunuga, senior research analyst at FXTM.
“This technical correction may send the commodity towards $1635 in the short term before bulls jump back into the game,” he told MarketWatch. However, “for as long as the coronavirus outbreak stimulates risk aversion and forces central banks to ease monetary policy, zero-yielding gold is destined to shine with $1700 acting as a key point of interest.”
Meanwhile, the Bank of England announced an emergency interest-rate cut of half a percentage point early Wednesday to 0.25% and launched a special financing facility to help businesses cope with the effects of the COVID-19 epidemic.
That comes after the Federal Reserve similarly cut interest rates by a half a percentage point in its first emergency rate cut since the 2008 financial crisis.
Central bank stimulus has provided a runway higher for precious metals like gold and driven yields of safe-havens like 10-year Treasury note yields under 1%, creating greater momentum for bullion, which doesn’t offer a coupon payment.
Among other metals Wednesday, May copper US:HGK20 fell 0.8% to $2.502 a pound. April platinum US:PLJ20 lost 0.1% to $868.20 an ounce, while June palladium US:PAM20 shed 3.8% to $2,229.30 an ounce.
Gun sales are rising and so are gun stocks.
