What happens to MF investment when an investor dies without nominating anyone? AMFI guideline
As per the Institute for Supply Management (ISM), U.S. industrial activities surged to 52.6 in June’20 from 43.1 in May’20. Many businesses have reopened, and unemployment woes are slowly decreasing.
German biotech firm BioNTech and U.S. pharmaceutical giant Pfizer have started human clinical trials of a potential vaccine, and this has shown a lot of promise.
However, coronavirus cases started to increase rapidly in parts of China and India and limited this downfall in the yellow metal prices. Pragmatic stimulus plans unfurled by major central banks, coupled with interest rates hovering near zero, helped in making gold an attractive investment option.
On Wednesday, WTI Crude prices ended lower by 1.40 per cent closing at $39.8 per barrel as the resurgent wave of the coronavirus, coupled with strict restrictions on air traffic in many regions of the globe, weighed on market sentiments.
There was a dip in U.S Crude Inventory levels with stocks plunging over 7.2 million barrels in the week ending on 26th June’20. There was also an increase in U.S factory production and manufacturing activities.
On Wednesday, most base metal prices on the London Metal Exchange (LME) ended higher amid positive economic data being generated by the largest metal consumer in the world, China. This pointed toward strengthening demand and led to the appreciation in prices.
As per data from the International Nickel Study Group (INSG), the global nickel market surplus decreased to 8,800 tonnes in April’20 from a revised figure of 10,900 tonnes in March’20.
Moreover, dwindling industrial metals inventories on the Shanghai Exchange, coupled with an increase in metal prices were strong signs of revival from China.
On Wednesday, LME Copper ended higher by 0.76 per cent to close at $6061 per tonne as mine shutdowns in Chile resulted in severe supply distress across the globe. The increase in red metal prices was also supported by upbeat economic data being generated by the U.S and China.
It has to be seen if human clinical trials for a potential coronavirus vaccine turn out to be fruitful and accepted. Meanwhile, governments have to focus on removing the worries of their citizens, which range from starvation to unemployment.
(By Prathamesh Mallya, AVP – Research Non-Agri Commodities and Currencies, Angel Broking Ltd)
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
