Gold futures climbed on Monday to mark another finish at their highest price in more than seven years, finding support as investors eyed losses in the stock market and weighed expectations for further moves by central banks and fiscal policy makers to boost the global economy.
Gold appears “to have solid big picture bullish fundamentals in place as deteriorating economic sentiment globally suggests even larger waves of government support will be seen in China, India, Europe and the U.S.,” analysts at Zaner Metals wrote in Monday commentary.
Gold for June delivery US:GCM20 on Comex climbed by $8.60, or 0.5%, to settle at $1,761.40 an ounce. That was the highest finish for a most-active contract since Oct. 11, 2012, according to Dow Jones Market Data. The metal had also marked a more than seven-year high on Thursday, even as stocks that day scored their biggest weekly advance since 1974. U.S. financial markets were closed Friday for the Good Friday holiday.
The most-active May contract for silver US:SIK20, which is both a precious and industrial metal, shed 51.6 cents, or 3.2%, to $15.537 an ounce. That followed a rise of 5.6% on Thursday.
Read: Gold may soon soar to a record $2,000 says analyst: we ‘borrowed from the future, and there is not though economy to pay it down’
Gold is often seen as a haven asset, moving inversely to risky securities like stocks. But analysts said efforts by central banks and fiscal policy makers to backstop the global economy as the COVID-19 pandemic takes its toll should also continue to buoy the yellow metal.
The Federal Reserve on Thursday set up new loan programs and bolstered exiting ones to provide $2.3 trillion in support for the economy.
“Gold’s biggest stumbles during this crisis have been because investors were on a search for cash liquidity to cover losses and margin calls elsewhere, not because their attitude toward gold shifted,” said Christopher Louney, analyst at RBC Capital Markets, in a note.
“Even as markets improve, whether temporarily or not, and investors come back, we think gold will also absorb inflows alongside other asset classes. Market participants are aware of the risks out there, and an asset like gold that we have long recommended as a risk overlay stands to receive ongoing support, and we think the firmest support is now at our high scenario,” he said.
Among other metals on Comex, May copper US:HGK20 rose 4.3 cents, or 1.9%, at $2.3025 a pound. July platinum PLN20,
gained $1.20, or 0.2% at $749.80, while June palladium US:PAM20 added $60.70, or 2.9%, to $2,170.70 an ounce.
