Gold futures gave up earlier gains on Thursday to finish lower for a third consecutive session, as U.S. bond yields traded above the day’s lows.
The rise in  bond yields helped offset support for the metal even as worries about the spread of the COVID-19 epidemic outside of China continued to spark selling in global equity markets.
Gold prices are “always sensitive to the outlook for interest rates, but it’s rarely been more strongly correlated against bond yields than it is right now,” said Adrian Ash, director of research at BullionVault. “So while the plunge in the stock market should keep driving gold higher, any pullback in these surging bond prices is also going to hit gold short-term.”
The 10-year Treasury note yield TMUBMUSD10Y,
traded above a record low of 1.2392% as gold futures settled.
“For gold versus rates it’s not the level that counts, but the direction,” Ash told MarketWatch.
Gold for April delivery US:GCJ20 on Comex fell by 60 cents, or 0.04%, to settle at $1,642.50 an ounce. Prices also fell on Tuesday and Wednesday, after settling at a seven-year high on Monday.
May silver US:SIK20 shed 17.9 cents, or 1%, to end at $17.735 an ounce, following a loss of 1.9% Wednesday.
“The rapid spread of the coronavirus beyond China has heightened investor’s fears over its potential impact on the global economy,” said Steven Dunn, head of exchange-traded funds at Aberdeen Standard Investments, in emailed commentary.
“Some are even suggesting an additional rate cut from the Fed at their March meeting which would provide further support for gold,” he added. “While the calls may be early, it is clear that global growth will be compromised the longer the virus remains uncontained.”
Read: More new coronavirus cases outside China than inside; WHO chief calls spread ‘deeply concerning’
A new coronavirus case was confirmed in Northern California , the first in the U.S. by someone who hasn’t traveled to infected areas or been in known contact with anyone who has, raising the worrisome prospect that the virus is spreading by other means.
“Uncertainty over the virus continues to see investors flocking towards the yellow metal, with gold ETF holdings increasing for 26 consecutive days, with inflows over that time growing by 2.72 million ounces to total 84.43 million ounces currently,” said Warren Patterson, head of commodities strategy at ING, in a note. “Given this uncertainty is likely to linger, along with the prospect for lower rates, it suggests that gold prices are the to remain well supported.”
In other metals trade, April platinum US:PLJ20 fell 1% at $905.50 an ounce, while June palladium US:PAM20 tacked on 1.7% to $2,711.70 an ounce, tallying another record finish.
May copper US:HGK20 fell 0.08% to $2.5715 a pound.
