Here's one for Treasurer Josh Frydenberg following his decision to beef up the country's foreign investment framework.
Goldsea Australian Mining, an Australian subsidiary of China's Shandong Goldsea Group Co, is trying to buy West Australian gold sector minnow Alto Metals for 6.5¢ a share.
Given the Treasurer's statement on March 29 and the perceived spirit of the changes, there's heightened interest in what happens next at Alto.
Goldsea, advised by Gilbert + Tobin and PCF Capital, released a bidders statement outlining its offer on March 24, right as the market had hit its COVID-19 inspired low.
The offer was made subject to a 90 per cent minimum acceptance condition and Foreign Investment Review Board approval, which Goldsea said it had already applied for.
Five days later, Frydenberg made a surprise move to increase foreign investment screening, by lowering FIRB approval thresholds in response to the market sell-off.
One consequence is that FIRB approval timelines could blow out from 30 days (lawyers reckon it's more like 60 days) to six months.
Alto looks like one of the first tests of the new measures. It's only small, but it's a foreign bidder with no other Australian interest or gold mining experience outside of its home market, turning up right as COVID-19 put the frights through the Australian market.
What makes this case particularly interesting is that there is an alternative proposal in front of the listed gold explorer's board from a neighbouring landowner.
That proposal is from Adaman, a privately owned Australian mining business with interests in WA's Mid West and Goldfields regions. It expects to produce 100,000 ounces of gold in the coming financial year and already has a 10 per cent equity stake in Alto.
If Adaman's proposal gets up, it plans to mine and haul the ore to its Kirkalocka plant processing mill. Perth-based boutique Argonaut is understood to be in Adaman's camp.
The Treasurer obviously has plenty on his plate – and Alto's not high priority. But given his statement on March 29 and the perceived spirit of the changes, there's heightened interest in what happens next.
Sarah Thompson has co-edited Street Talk since 2009, specialising in private equity, investment banking, M&A and equity capital markets stories. Prior to that, she spent 10 years in London as a markets and M&A reporter at Bloomberg and Dow Jones. Email Sarah at sarah.thompson@afr.com
Anthony Macdonald co-edits Street Talk, specialising in private equity, investment banking, M&A and equity capital markets. He has 10 years' experience as a business journalist and worked at PwC, auditing and advising financial services companies. Connect with Anthony on Twitter . Email Anthony at a.macdonald@afr.com
Tim Boyd is a journalist based in Sydney who writes for the Street Talk column. Connect with Tim on Twitter . Email Tim at tim.boyd@afr.com
