Silver leads losses among Comex metals, down nearly 4%
Gold futures ended at their lowest in a week on Wednesday, snapping a multiday climb that had lifted prices for the metal to a more than seven-year high a day earlier.
The sharp pullback in bullion prices came as the dollar was firmly higher, providing some resistance to the asset’s recent climb toward an all-time high.
Dollar gains have come as a demand for the perceived safety of the word’s reserve currency has increased due to worries about the global economic impact of the coronavirus and a renewed downturn in crude-oil CL.1,
against a basket of a half-dozen rivals was up 0.6% in Wednesday dealings. A stronger dollar can make assets priced in the currency more expensive to buyers using other monetary units.
The dollar is back in favor “as stocks tumble on the various warnings, which is pulling gold off its newly established highs,” wrote Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at Oanda, in a Wednesday research note.
Gold for June delivery US:GCM20 on Comex fell $28.70, or 1.6%, to settle at $1,740.20 an ounce, marking the lowest finish for most-active contract since April 8, according to FactSet data. Prices marked a fourth straight session climb on Tuesday to settle at the highest since October 2012.
“When the market’s in a risk-off mood, like today, institutional investors will sell everything that’s not government-guaranteed,” Marshall Gittler, head of investment research at BDSwiss Group, told MarketWatch. “The firmer dollar probably didn’t help either.”
That said, some analysts appear to be upbeat about the long-term prospects for the yellow metal.
“If we are due a pullback in risk markets then that could slow gold’s progress, if the dollar remains in favor, but longer term, this environment is very favorable and I think all-time highs may not be too far away,” Erlam wrote.
Investors digested a slate of U.S. economic reports, including the New York Fed’s Empire State business conditions index, which plummeted to -78.2 in April, marking the lowest reading on record. And a reading on retail sales saw a record 8.7% slump in sales at U.S. retailers.
Gold largely maintained losses after that downbeat data.
Meanwhile, the International Energy Agency earlier in the day said we may see the worst year in modern history for oil markets.
Elsewhere in Comex, the most-active May contract for silver US:SIK20 fell 62.5 cents, or 3.9%, to $15.505 an ounce, giving up a chunk of its 3.8% advance from Tuesday. May copper US:HGK20 shed 1.4% to $2.296 a pound.
