Gold prices ended lower Monday, with a cautiously optimistic tone for stocks denting haven-related demand for the yellow metal.
Gold for June delivery GC00,
on Comex fell $11.80, or 0.7%, to settle at $1,723.80 an ounce, after posting a 2.2% weekly gain, and its fourth weekly rise in five weeks on Friday, according to FactSet data.
May silver US:SIK20 lost 5.3 cents, or nearly 0.4%, to close at $15.21 an ounce, following a weekly loss of 0.2%.
The latest plunge in crude-oil prices US:CLM20, meanwhile, “puts the threat of falling consumer prices front and center again. That’s denting the gold price, because it’s pushing real interest rates higher,” Adrian Ash, director of research at BullionVault, told MarketWatch.
Still, bullish analysts contend that gold should remain supported even as lockdowns intended to limit the spread of the novel strain of coronavirus are rolled back, given uncertainty over the speed of a subsequent economic rebound.
“Even when the lockdown is lifted, the world will still be far from any kind of normality. In fact, the bigger risk then is economic collapse, as indicated by the disastrous economic indicators virtually everywhere,” said Carsten Fritsch, analyst at Commerzbank in a note. “To counter this, governments around the globe are likely to continue spending unparalleled sums of money — most of which will be created by the central banks.”
The states of Georgia, Oklahoma and Alaska started loosening restrictions on businesses despite warnings from public-health experts that such moves could be premature. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said the state will likely begin to reopen the economy in certain areas “with certain precautions after May 15.”
Children in Spain were allowed outdoors for the first time in six weeks if accompanied by an adult on Sunday and the government will allow Spaniards to leave their homes for walks and exercise starting May 2.
Italy and Belgium laid out plans to begin easing some restrictions on May 4, while France aims to begin easing its lockdown on May 11.
This week, investors are “keen to know what steps will be taken next by the Federal Reserve and European Central Bank,” said Hussein Sayed, chief market strategist at FXTM.
“For the ECB, it’s widely expected to raise its limits for asset purchases and continue to pressure eurozone governments for further fiscal stimulus measures,” he said in a note. “We are also expecting to see further discussions related to creating a bad bank, which is clearly needed to confront the upcoming recession.” The ECB holds it monetary policy meeting on Thursday.
Meanwhile, the Fed is “not likely to announce anything new” in its policy statement due Wednesday, said Sayed.
However, “after successfully calming the markets with several unscheduled policy decisions, it is time to hear the FOMC’s outlook on the U.S. economy and what additional action can be taken if the situation deteriorates further,” he said.
Elsewhere, May copper US:HGK20 tacked on 1.3 cents, or 0.6%, to end at $2.35 a pound, up a fourth consecutive session following a weekly loss of 0.3% for the industrial metal. July platinum PLN20,
added $3.20, or 0.4%, finishing at $777 an ounce, following a weekly decline of 1.5% for the commodity. June palladium US:PAM20 ended $90.50, or 4.6%, lower at $1,894.80 an ounce, after finishing Friday with a weekly loss of 6.8%.
Gun sales are rising and so are gun stocks.
