The Motley Fool Canada » Investing » Got $1,000? Consider 3 TSX Stocks That Are Ready to Climb Higher
Vineet Kulkarni | June 29, 2020 | More on: CAE GOOS WPM CAE GOOS WPM
Even if the TSX Index has rallied more than 35% since March, few quality stocks are still trading close to their record lows. Investors who are sitting on some cash can consider putting it in these TSX stocks. With their strong fundamentals and attractive growth potential, investors can generate a handsome reserve over the long term.
While the air traffic is not expected to normalize anytime soon, many big airline companies might continue to struggle in short to intermediate term. Thus, investors can consider shares of CAE (TSX:CAE) (NYSE:CAE) , which offer a much better risk/reward proposition.
CAE is a Canadian company that develops simulation technologies for civil aviation, defence, and healthcare segments. The company generates approximately 45% of revenues from the healthcare and defence segments.
Its aviation business might take time to stabilize due to the pandemic, but defence and healthcare segments continue to offer strong growth potential.
The company’s diversified revenue base, a large global presence, and a solid balance sheet will likely support CAE’s relatively fast recovery. In the last five years, CAE stock has soared almost 50%.
CAE stock is still trading 50% lower to its pre-pandemic levels and looks fairly valued from the valuation perspective at the moment.
A $26 billion Wheaton Precious Metals (TSX:WPM) (NYSE:WPM) is one of the largest precious metals streaming companies. Interestingly, Wheaton stands tall against traditional miners on several fronts.
Streamers like Wheaton do not own or operate mines and thus are relatively low-risk, high-margin businesses. Wheaton investors can enjoy higher precious metals prices with a much lower risk profile against a traditional mining company.
Gold prices have been rallying from the last few months, and that has notably boosted gold miners’ bottom lines. The trend is likely to continue, which will also drive precious metals stocks higher.
Wheaton stock has soared more than 250% in the last five years. So far this year, it has surged almost 55% and looks a bit stretched from the valuation perspective. However, a bullish outlook for gold and Wheaton’s decent risk/reward proposition make it an attractive bet for investors.
Despite the recent rally, Canada Goose Holdings (TSX:GOOS) (NYSE:GOOS) stock is trading much lower to pre-pandemic levels.
It exhibited superior revenue growth in the last three years, notably exceeding the industry trends. Importantly, last quarter’s earnings exceeded expectations and showed that the outdoor apparel maker is better placed to weather the crisis.
Canada Goose’s geographically diversified revenue base makes its top line relatively stable. Its expansion into direct-to-consumer sales with both online platforms and with brick-and-mortar stores has worked out pretty well recently. Continued efforts on the same front will most likely speed up its earnings growth further.
As economies reopen after weeks-long lockdowns, the parka manufacturer will soon see its revenues normalizing. Online sales will also support its top-line growth to some extent.
Canada Goose stock is currently trading 36 times its estimated earnings, which indicates a premium. However, it might be warranted given the strong earnings potential.
Looking for some MORE interesting stocks?
Renowned Canadian investor Iain Butler just named 10 stocks for Canadians to buy TODAY. So if you’re tired of reading about other people getting rich in the stock market, this might be a good day for you.
Because Motley Fool Canada is offering a full 65% off the list price of their top stock-picking service, plus a complete membership fee back guarantee on what you pay for the service. Simply click here to discover how you can take advantage of this.
Fool contributor Vineet Kulkarni has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool owns shares of and recommends Canada Goose Holdings.
Two New Stock Picks Every Month!
Not to alarm you, but you’re about to miss an important event.
Iain Butler and the Stock Advisor Canada team only publish their new “buy alerts” twice a month, and only to an exclusively small group.
This is your chance to get in early on what could prove to be very special investment advice.
Enter your email address below to get started now, and join the other thousands of Canadians who have already signed up for their chance to get the market-beating advice from Stock Advisor Canada.
I consent to receiving information from The Motley Fool via email, direct mail, and occasional special offer phone calls. I understand I can unsubscribe from these updates at any time. Please read the Privacy Statement and Terms of Service for more information.
