The Department of Water and Environmental Regulation issued permits relating to a number of facilities classified as pollution emitters, such as sewage and electric power facilities
These permits are subject to the satisfaction of several conditions, including design requirements, pollution limits and compliance reporting
Hastings Technology Metals shares are grey on the market today, last trading for 12 cents each
Hastings Technology Metals (HAS) has received government approval for the construction of its Yangibana Rare Earths Project in Western Australia.
Located in the state’s Upper Gascoyne Region, the proposed beneficiation and hydro metallurgy processing plant will treat rare earth deposits — primarily neodymium and praseodymium-hosted monazite — to produce a mixed carbonate. This carbonate will then be further refined into rare earth oxides at processing plants overseas.
Neodymium and praseodymium are key components in the production of permanent magnets, which are often used in electric vehicles, wind turbines, robotics and medical applications.
Following a detailed assessment process, the WA Department of Water and Environmental Regulation issued a number of permits relating to proposed facilities considered to be pollution emitters. These include electric power generation and landfill sites, sewage facilities and the bulk storage of chemicals.
While the permits have been secured, they remain subject to the satisfaction of several conditions which cover design and construction requirements, pollutant emission caps, monitoring policies and compliance reporting.
Andrew Reid, Chief Operating Officer of Hastings Technology Metals, said the successful receipt of the permits stokes confidence in the project’s ability to operate as an environmentally conscious asset.
“While Hastings has received State and Commonwealth environmental approvals, the additional focus and rigorous nature of this approval process on polluting facilities such as the process plant provides us and our shareholders with further confidence that the Yangibana Project is able to meet the high regulatory standards set by the Western Australian government," Andrew noted.
“The regulatory standards set by the WA Government also provide the international community and our major offtake customer, Schaeffler Technologies AG with the assurance that the extraction component of the rare earths supply chain is undertaken in an environmentally responsible manner,” he added.
Hastings is now working to meet the required permit conditions and plans to commence construction upon completion of the necessary financing.
Hastings Technology Metals shares are grey on the market today, last trading for 12 cents each.
