Have Insiders Been Selling Dundee Precious Metals Inc. (TSE:DPM) Shares This Year?
Simply Wall St October 21, 2019
We’ve lost count of how many times insiders have accumulated shares in a company that goes on to improve markedly. The flip side of that is that there are more than a few examples of insiders dumping stock prior to a period of weak performance. So before you buy or sell Dundee Precious Metals Inc. ( TSE:DPM ), you may well want to know whether insiders have been buying or selling.
It’s quite normal to see company insiders, such as board members, trading in company stock, from time to time. However, rules govern insider transactions, and certain disclosures are required.
We don’t think shareholders should simply follow insider transactions. But equally, we would consider it foolish to ignore insider transactions altogether. As Peter Lynch said, ‘insiders might sell their shares for any number of reasons, but they buy them for only one: they think the price will rise.
In the last twelve months, the biggest single purchase by an insider was when insider Thomas Claugus bought CA$69k worth of shares at a price of CA$3.54 per share. Even though the purchase was made at a significantly lower price than the recent price (CA$4.45), we still think insider buying is a positive. Because the shares were purchased at a lower price, this particular buy doesn’t tell us much about how insiders feel about the current share price.
In total, Dundee Precious Metals insiders sold more than they bought over the last year. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. By clicking on the graph below, you can see the precise details of each insider transaction!
If you are like me, then you will not want to miss this free list of growing companies that insiders are buying.
The last three months saw significant insider selling at Dundee Precious Metals. In total, insider Thomas Claugus sold US$191k worth of shares in that time, and we didn’t record any purchases whatsoever. This may suggest that some insiders think that the shares are not cheap.
Many investors like to check how much of a company is owned by insiders. I reckon it’s a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. Our data indicates that Dundee Precious Metals insiders own about CA$7.2m worth of shares (which is 0.9% of the company). But they may have an indirect interest through a corporate structure that we haven’t picked up on. We do generally prefer see higher levels of insider ownership.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Dundee Precious Metals Insiders?
An insider hasn’t bought Dundee Precious Metals stock in the last three months, but there was some selling. And our longer term analysis of insider transactions didn’t bring confidence, either. But since Dundee Precious Metals is profitable and growing, we’re not too worried by this. When you consider that most companies have higher levels of insider ownership, we’re a little wary. So we’re not rushing to buy, to say the least. Of course, the future is what matters most. So if you are interested in Dundee Precious Metals, you should check out this free report on analyst forecasts for the company .
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St does a detailed discounted cash flow calculation every 6 hours for every stock on the market, so if you want to find the intrinsic value of any company just search here . It’s FREE.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
