Have Silvercorp Metals Inc. (TSE:SVM) Insiders Been Selling Their Stock?
Simply Wall St November 25, 2019
We’d be surprised if Silvercorp Metals Inc. ( TSE:SVM ) shareholders haven’t noticed that the Chairman & CEO, Rui Feng, recently sold CA$380k worth of stock at CA$6.34 per share. On the bright side, that sale was only 1.1% of their holding, so we doubt it’s very meaningful, on its own.
In fact, the recent sale by Chairman & CEO Rui Feng was not their only sale of Silvercorp Metals shares this year. Earlier in the year, they fetched CA$5.02 per share in a -CA$499.9k sale. That means that even when the share price was below the current price of CA$6.17, an insider wanted to cash in some shares. As a general rule we consider it to be discouraging when insiders are selling below the current price, because it suggests they were happy with a lower valuation. However, while insider selling is sometimes discouraging, it’s only a weak signal. It is worth noting that this sale was only 1.9% of Rui Feng’s holding.
We note that in the last year insiders divested 830956 shares for a total of CA$3.9m. Insiders in Silvercorp Metals didn’t buy any shares in the last year. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
For those who like to find winning investments this free list of growing companies with recent insider purchasing, could be just the ticket.
Another way to test the alignment between the leaders of a company and other shareholders is to look at how many shares they own. I reckon it’s a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. It appears that Silvercorp Metals insiders own 3.8% of the company, worth about CA$41m. We’ve certainly seen higher levels of insider ownership elsewhere, but these holdings are enough to suggest alignment between insiders and the other shareholders.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Silvercorp Metals Insiders?
Insiders sold Silvercorp Metals shares recently, but they didn’t buy any. And there weren’t any purchases to give us comfort, over the last year. But since Silvercorp Metals is profitable and growing, we’re not too worried by this. Insiders own shares, but we’re still pretty cautious, given the history of sales. We’d think twice before buying! Of course, the future is what matters most. So if you are interested in Silvercorp Metals, you should check out this free report on analyst forecasts for the company .
If you would prefer to check out another company — one with potentially superior financials — then do not miss this free list of interesting companies, that have HIGH return on equity and low debt.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
