Have Insiders Been Buying Discovery Metals Corp. (CVE:DSV) Shares?
Simply Wall St March 14, 2020
It is not uncommon to see companies perform well in the years after insiders buy shares. Unfortunately, there are also plenty of examples of share prices declining precipitously after insiders have sold shares. So before you buy or sell Discovery Metals Corp. ( CVE:DSV ), you may well want to know whether insiders have been buying or selling.
It is perfectly legal for company insiders, including board members, to buy and sell stock in a company. However, most countries require that the company discloses such transactions to the market.
We don’t think shareholders should simply follow insider transactions. But it is perfectly logical to keep tabs on what insiders are doing. As Peter Lynch said, ‘insiders might sell their shares for any number of reasons, but they buy them for only one: they think the price will rise.
Over the last year, we can see that the biggest insider purchase was by insider Eric Sprott for CA$4.0m worth of shares, at about CA$0.23 per share. We do like to see buying, but this purchase was made at well below the current price of CA$0.30. Because the shares were purchased at a lower price, this particular buy doesn’t tell us much about how insiders feel about the current share price.
In the last twelve months insiders purchased 26.98m shares for CA$8.0m. But they sold 430000 shares for CA$206k. In total, Discovery Metals insiders bought more than they sold over the last year. The average buy price was around CA$0.29. It’s great to see insiders putting their own cash into the company’s stock, albeit at below the recent share price. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
There are always plenty of stocks that insiders are buying. So if that suits your style you could check each stock one by one or you could take a look at this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
For a common shareholder, it is worth checking how many shares are held by company insiders. We usually like to see fairly high levels of insider ownership. Insiders own 31% of Discovery Metals shares, worth about CA$20m. We’ve certainly seen higher levels of insider ownership elsewhere, but these holdings are enough to suggest alignment between insiders and the other shareholders.
So What Does This Data Suggest About Discovery Metals Insiders?
The fact that there have been no Discovery Metals insider transactions recently certainly doesn’t bother us. On a brighter note, the transactions over the last year are encouraging. Insiders do have a stake in Discovery Metals and their transactions don’t cause us concern. So these insider transactions can help us build a thesis about the stock, but it’s also worthwhile knowing the risks facing this company. To that end, you should learn about the 5 warning signs we’ve spotted with Discovery Metals (including 1 which is a bit concerning) .
Of course Discovery Metals may not be the best stock to buy. So you may wish to see this free collection of high quality companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
