Have Insiders Been Selling Catalyst Metals Limited (ASX:CYL) Shares?
Simply Wall St April 14, 2020
We’ve lost count of how many times insiders have accumulated shares in a company that goes on to improve markedly. Unfortunately, there are also plenty of examples of share prices declining precipitously after insiders have sold shares. So we’ll take a look at whether insiders have been buying or selling shares in Catalyst Metals Limited ( ASX:CYL ).
It’s quite normal to see company insiders, such as board members, trading in company stock, from time to time. However, such insiders must disclose their trading activities, and not trade on inside information.
We would never suggest that investors should base their decisions solely on what the directors of a company have been doing. But equally, we would consider it foolish to ignore insider transactions altogether. For example, a Harvard University study found that ‘insider purchases earn abnormal returns of more than 6% per year.
Over the last year, we can see that the biggest insider sale was by the Non-Executive Chairman, Stephen Boston, for AU$129k worth of shares, at about AU$3.11 per share. While we don’t usually like to see insider selling, it’s more concerning if the sales take place at a lower price. The silver lining is that this sell-down took place above the latest price (AU$2.24). So it is hard to draw any strong conclusion from it.
In total, Catalyst Metals insiders sold more than they bought over the last year. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. If you want to know exactly who sold, for how much, and when, simply click on the graph below!
If you like to buy stocks that insiders are buying, rather than selling, then you might just love this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
We have seen a bit of insider selling at Catalyst Metals, over the last three months. Non-Executive Chairman Stephen Boston sold just AU$24k worth of shares in that time. It’s not great to see insider selling, nor the lack of recent buyers. But the volume sold is so low that it really doesn’t bother us.
Does Catalyst Metals Boast High Insider Ownership?
Many investors like to check how much of a company is owned by insiders. We usually like to see fairly high levels of insider ownership. It appears that Catalyst Metals insiders own 19% of the company, worth about AU$35m. This level of insider ownership is good but just short of being particularly stand-out. It certainly does suggest a reasonable degree of alignment.
So What Do The Catalyst Metals Insider Transactions Indicate?
While there has not been any insider buying in the last three months, there has been selling. But the sales were small, so we’re not concerned. Recent sales exacerbate our caution arising from analysis of Catalyst Metals insider transactions. The modest level of insider ownership is, at least, some comfort. In addition to knowing about insider transactions going on, it’s beneficial to identify the risks facing Catalyst Metals. Case in point: We’ve spotted 5 warning signs for Catalyst Metals you should be aware of, and 2 of these are potentially serious.
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
