High growth shares, and IT stocks in particular, have overperformed the broader market in the last several years. Imagine buying Amazon in 2009! But there are still lots of industries now that can help you get rich and retire early.
To start with, I consider myself to be a value investor. That is, I prefer to invest in large companies with good balance sheets and long operational histories. At the same time, I prefer to buy them at low multipliers. And I still believe that a large percentage of an investor’s portfolio should consist of such companies . Buying a FTSE 100 index fund would be an even better decision for novice investors who hate risks.
However, I’d also like to talk about high growth shares. They tend to be issued by smaller companies operating in innovative industries. They seem to be much less conservative, but at the same time they offer plenty of opportunities to get rich.
There is a handful of industries now that offer extraodinary potential for growth. Electric vehicles (EVs) still seem to be one of these. But EVs don’t appear out of nowhere. So, there are many businesses directly benefitting from rising vehicle sales.
To start with, EVs need electric batteries to operate. Lithium and cobalt are essential materials for these batteries. What is more, lithium and cobalt are important components of other electric batteries, including the ones used in e-scooters, smartphones, and laptops. Although the demand for laptops and smartphones kept increasing before the Covid-19 outbreak, the growth rate was not as high as for EVs. Most cobalt comes from the Democratic Republic of Congo, and it seems to me that there will be a big deficit of this material quite soon. So, companies with access to cobalt have a strategic advantage.
We can say a very similar thing about rare earth metals, which are also necessary for making EV motors. 90% of them are mined in China. The problem is that there is plenty of uncertainty about US-China relations. Last year I read about the possibility of China refusing to export rare earth metals to the US. If this really happens, countries mining the remaining 10% of these metals will benefit. Most importantly the mining companies will benefit, of course.
Obviously, EV companies and their suppliers are not the only high growth industry. There are plenty of other high growth areas worth considering for an enterprising investor. But it’s necessary to choose carefully before buying the businesses operating in these sectors. It is essential to analyse accounting fundamentals before buying a firm’s shares. If you choose the ‘right’ industries and the ‘right’ high growth shares, you will most probably get rich and retire early.
If it's best-in-class stocks that you are looking for, we can surely help you.
Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all fired up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the pandemic!).
But its capital-light, highly scalable business model has previously helped it deliver consistently high sales, astounding near-70% margins, and rising shareholder returns … in fact, in 2019 it returned a whopping £150m+ to shareholders in dividends and buybacks!
While COVID-19 may have thrown the company a curveball, management have acted swiftly to ensure this business is as well placed as it can be to ride out the current period of uncertainty… in fact, our analyst believes it should come roaring back to life, just as soon as normal economic activity resumes.
That’s why we think now could be the perfect time for you to start building your own stake in this exceptional business – especially given the shares look to be trading on a fairly undemanding valuation for the year to March 2021.
Click here to claim your copy of this special report now — and we’ll tell you the name of this Top Growth Share… free of charge!
Anna Sokolidou has no position in any of the companies mentioned in this article. John Mackey, CEO of Whole Foods Market, an Amazon subsidiary, is a member of The Motley Fool’s board of directors. The Motley Fool UK owns shares of and has recommended Amazon and recommends the following options: long January 2022 $1920 calls on Amazon and short January 2022 $1940 calls on Amazon. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
