How Many Lomiko Metals Inc. (CVE:LMR) Shares Did Insiders Buy, In The Last Year?
Simply Wall St April 10, 2020
We often see insiders buying up shares in companies that perform well over the long term. On the other hand, we’d be remiss not to mention that insider sales have been known to precede tough periods for a business. So shareholders might well want to know whether insiders have been buying or selling shares in Lomiko Metals Inc. ( CVE:LMR ).
It’s quite normal to see company insiders, such as board members, trading in company stock, from time to time. However, most countries require that the company discloses such transactions to the market.
We would never suggest that investors should base their decisions solely on what the directors of a company have been doing. But it is perfectly logical to keep tabs on what insiders are doing. For example, a Harvard University study found that ‘insider purchases earn abnormal returns of more than 6% per year.
In the last twelve months, the biggest single purchase by an insider was when President Amrit Paul Gill bought CA$81k worth of shares at a price of CA$0.05 per share. That means that an insider was happy to buy shares at above the current price of CA$0.025. Their view may have changed since then, but at least it shows they felt optimistic at the time. To us, it’s very important to consider the price insiders pay for shares. It is generally more encouraging if they paid above the current price, as it suggests they saw value, even at higher levels. Notably Amrit Paul Gill was also the biggest seller.
In the last twelve months insiders purchased 4.66m shares for CA$172k. But insiders sold 2350000 shares worth CA$100k. In the last twelve months there was more buying than selling by Lomiko Metals insiders. They paid about CA$0.037 on average. These transactions suggest that insiders have considered the current price attractive. The chart below shows insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year. If you click on the chart, you can see all the individual transactions, including the share price, individual, and the date!
Lomiko Metals is not the only stock insiders are buying. So take a peek at this free list of growing companies with insider buying.
Over the last three months, we’ve seen a bit of insider buying at Lomiko Metals. They bought CA$82k worth in that time. But President Amrit Paul Gill sold CA$26k worth. It is nice to see that insiders have bought, but the quantum isn’t large enough to get us excited.
For a common shareholder, it is worth checking how many shares are held by company insiders. We usually like to see fairly high levels of insider ownership. Insiders own 15% of Lomiko Metals shares, worth about CA$316k, according to our data. Whilst better than nothing, we’re not overly impressed by these holdings.
So What Do The Lomiko Metals Insider Transactions Indicate?
It’s certainly positive to see the recent insider purchases. And the longer term insider transactions also give us confidence. But we don’t feel the same about the fact the company is making losses. While the overall levels of insider ownership are below what we’d like to see, the history of transactions imply that Lomiko Metals insiders are reasonably well aligned, and optimistic for the future. So these insider transactions can help us build a thesis about the stock, but it’s also worthwhile knowing the risks facing this company. Be aware that Lomiko Metals is showing 5 warning signs in our investment analysis , and 4 of those can’t be ignored…
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
