How Many BTU Metals Corp. (CVE:BTU) Shares Did Insiders Buy, In The Last Year?
Simply Wall St April 6, 2020
We often see insiders buying up shares in companies that perform well over the long term. The flip side of that is that there are more than a few examples of insiders dumping stock prior to a period of weak performance. So before you buy or sell BTU Metals Corp. ( CVE:BTU ), you may well want to know whether insiders have been buying or selling.
Most investors know that it is quite permissible for company leaders, such as directors of the board, to buy and sell stock in the company. However, such insiders must disclose their trading activities, and not trade on inside information.
We don’t think shareholders should simply follow insider transactions. But it is perfectly logical to keep tabs on what insiders are doing. As Peter Lynch said, ‘insiders might sell their shares for any number of reasons, but they buy them for only one: they think the price will rise.
Over the last year, we can see that the biggest insider purchase was by insider Ryan Kalt for CA$159k worth of shares, at about CA$0.13 per share. That means that an insider was happy to buy shares at around the current price of CA$0.14. That means they have been optimistic about the company in the past, though they may have changed their mind. If someone buys shares at well below current prices, it’s a good sign on balance, but keep in mind they may no longer see value. The good news for BTU Metals share holders is that insiders were buying at near the current price.
Over the last year, we can see that insiders have bought 1.43m shares worth CA$188k. But they sold 505000 shares for CA$114k. Overall, BTU Metals insiders were net buyers during the last year. You can see the insider transactions (by individuals) over the last year depicted in the chart below. By clicking on the graph below, you can see the precise details of each insider transaction!
There are always plenty of stocks that insiders are buying. So if that suits your style you could check each stock one by one or you could take a look at this free list of companies. (Hint: insiders have been buying them).
Over the last three months, we’ve seen a bit of insider selling at BTU Metals. President & Director Michael England divested only CA$38k worth of shares in that time. It’s not great to see insider selling, nor the lack of recent buyers. But the volume sold is so low that it really doesn’t bother us.
Does BTU Metals Boast High Insider Ownership?
Many investors like to check how much of a company is owned by insiders. I reckon it’s a good sign if insiders own a significant number of shares in the company. Our data indicates that BTU Metals insiders own about CA$1.4m worth of shares (which is 12% of the company). But they may have an indirect interest through a corporate structure that we haven’t picked up on. Overall, this level of ownership isn’t that impressive, but it’s certainly better than nothing!
What Might The Insider Transactions At BTU Metals Tell Us?
We did not see any insider buying in the last three months, but we did see selling. But given the selling was modest, we’re not worried. On a brighter note, the transactions over the last year are encouraging. The transactions are fine but it’d be more encouraging if BTU Metals insiders bought more shares in the company. So while it’s helpful to know what insiders are doing in terms of buying or selling, it’s also helpful to know the risks that a particular company is facing. At Simply Wall St, we’ve found that BTU Metals has 6 warning signs (4 are potentially serious!) that deserve your attention before going any further with your analysis.
Of course, you might find a fantastic investment by looking elsewhere. So take a peek at this free list of interesting companies.
For the purposes of this article, insiders are those individuals who report their transactions to the relevant regulatory body. We currently account for open market transactions and private dispositions, but not derivative transactions.
If you spot an error that warrants correction, please contact the editor at editorial-team@simplywallst.com . This article by Simply Wall St is general in nature. It does not constitute a recommendation to buy or sell any stock, and does not take account of your objectives, or your financial situation. Simply Wall St has no position in the stocks mentioned.
We aim to bring you long-term focused research analysis driven by fundamental data. Note that our analysis may not factor in the latest price-sensitive company announcements or qualitative material. Thank you for reading.
Save hours of research when discovering your next investment with Simply Wall St. Looking for companies potentially undervalued based on their future cash flows? Or maybe you’re looking for sustainable dividend payers or high growth potential stocks. Customise your search to easily find new investment opportunities that match your investment goals. And the best thing about it? It’s FREE. Click here to learn more .
Simply Wall St is a financial technology startup focused on providing unbiased, high-quality research coverage on every listed company in the world. Our research team consists of equity analysts with a public, market-beating track record. Learn more about the team behind Simply Wall St .
Become a better investor Simply Wall St is an award winning start-up aiming to replace human stockbrokers by providing you with high quality financial data and analysis presented in a beautiful visual way everybody can understand, at a fraction of the cost (try our FREE plan).
						appropriate for your situation and seek appropriate financial, taxation and legal advice. Please read our Financial Services Guide before deciding whether to obtain
						financial services from us. Simply Wall Street Pty Ltd (ACN 600 056 611), is a Corporate Authorised
						Representative (Authorised Representative Number: 467183) of Sanlam Private Wealth Pty Ltd (AFSL No.
