Do you track PI Industries?
Yes, we do. If you look at the last few years, when the domestic growth has been sluggish, the entire CRAM space companies which are engaged in contract research and manufacturing across both the agrochem and the pharma space have done reasonably or exceedingly well. It is because they have not been constrained by domestic growth and they have been able to drive their growth through contract research for global clients.
In an environment where domestic growth is going to remain sluggish for some time to come, probably these companies will continue to deliver strong growth and in that context we have also seen a very sharp PE re-rating that has happened in companies across the sectors and probably these companies will continue to do well.
What have you bought in your fund which could be a digital theme or a data theme?
We own Reliance Industries NSE 1.57 % as a play on telecom and digital and we have been owning this for a long while. So that is a very comprehensive play on both telecom and digital across the board and also on retail. Apart from that, we also own a company called InfoEdge. It is again a very strong play on digital businesses across jobs and property markets and they have investments in a lot of other budding digital ventures. So that is the other one we own.
Do you have any favourites within the metal universe; be it a short-term trade?
You have to be really brave to be buying into some of these names because the kind of swings that happened in this whole basket of metals is really wild. Unfortunately we are not so brave. So while some of these names could be a nice play on global economies opening up and normalising because they have corrected very sharply, I still think that there are better opportunities available in other segments of the market and probably opportunities to make money with much less volatility.
It is always a difficult choice between Axis Bank or ICICI Bank. Both have their own merits?
Both the banks have gone through a deep NPA cycle over the last three or four years and when they were at the virtual fag end of their NPA cycle, we got hit by this whole Covid crisis, which has obviously set the ball rolling for another round of asset quality issues for the whole sector as a whole. Having said that, both the banks are reasonably well-capitalised and probably should be able to deal with the crisis though probably the impact could be somewhat higher for Axis in the near term.
But having said that, they have just gone through a capital raising cycle a few months back. So I think they are very well-capitalised to deal with the environment. From slightly more medium term to normal term perspective, both of them look compelling though ICICI at this point of time looks slightly more resilient and safer bet for the simple reason that over 50% of their portfolio is now retail mortgages, which should be relatively less prone to this whole crisis and probably should see lesser asset quality issues on a relative scale.
What is your own view on auto ancillaries?
If you look at the whole sector, both autos and auto ancillaries have seen significant dislocation. These sectors were already under tremendous pressure because of the slowing economy that we had last year and because of the transition that was about to play up in BS-IV to BS-VI in the early part of this year. Now with this crisis, the sector has been under tremendous pressure including ancillaries.
But eventually from whatever we have seen initially in China, as the economy started opening up, there has been a significant surge in demand for two wheelers and small cars because people prefer personal transportation versus using mass transit systems. In India, if you look across some of the major cities, we are heavily dependent on mass transportation. In a city like Bombay, 80% of people use mass transportation and even a small switch from there to personal transportation could lead to a significant increase in demand for both autos and subsequently for auto ancillaries.
So I think it is time to take a slightly more medium term view on the sector. The outlook of the sector is currently under tremendous pressure but I am sure gradually as economies open up and normalise, the sector will recover. Coming back to auto ancs, one should look at some of the more stronger names and more resilient names with much stronger balance sheets because some of these auto ancs where balance sheets are significantly leveraged might have a difficult time going forward. So I think within the auto ancs, one should play companies with more resilient balance sheets.
