From 1926 through March 2020, dividends accounted for 40.2 percent of the total return of the S&P 500. But because direct ownership of stock has been declining — while indirect stock ownership, through mutual funds and pension funds, has risen — dividend payments are hidden from view. In addition, since the early 1980s, stock buybacks have increasingly become a conduit for channeling money into the hands of investors, reducing the role of dividends.
Even so, stock dividends, which flow into mutual funds and portfolios and are reinvested, have continued to play a large role in investor returns over extended periods, said Jeremy Siegel, the University of Pennsylvania economist. “Compounded dividends are amazingly powerful, even if people don’t realize it,” he said.
Indeed, over the 30 years through March, Bloomberg data shows, if you held an S&P 500 index fund, nearly half your total return would have derived from the compounding effect of reinvested dividends. Based just on price appreciation, the index rose 683 percent in that period; including reinvested dividends, it returned 1,330 percent.
The flip side of that compounding magic is that dividend cuts will reduce your portfolio returns — or deepen the agony when stocks decline.
During the last financial crisis, for example, from 2007 to 2009, companies in the S&P 500 slashed dividends by a total of 29 percent, Mr. Yardeni estimates. The coronavirus recession is likely to result in dividend cuts of around the same magnitude, analysts say; Goldman Sachs last week put the projected cuts at 25 percent. Mr. Yardeni said the cuts could be even larger than those of that crisis.
This is no trivial matter. In the S&P 500 alone, annual dividends amounted to almost $500 billion in the 12 months through March. That means that investors could collectively lose between $100 billion and $150 billion in dividend cuts in this recession, on top of their losses from stock price declines.
The cuts are only beginning, but a formidable group of publicly traded companies have already announced that they will either reduce or suspend dividends. They include:
Restaurant chains like Darden Restaurants, Bloomin’ Brands and Texas Roadhouse.
Travel-related companies like Marriott International, Sabre, Delta Air Lines, Alaska Air, Boeing and Carnival.
Energy companies like Apache, Occidental Petroleum, Targa Resources and DCP Midstream.
And a smattering of others, including Ford Motor and the mining company Freeport-McMoRan.
Conspicuously absent from that list, at least so far, are big banks like Bank of America, Citi, Wells Fargo and JPMorgan Chase. While banks have announced that they are voluntarily stopping stock buybacks — which were a pillar of the long bull market that ended this year — they have managed to hold the line on dividends, which they reduced or suspended during the financial crisis.
Financial service companies accounted for 20.5 percent of all S&P 500 dividends in 2008 but only 9 percent by 2010, according to data provided by Howard Silverblatt, senior index analyst for S&P Dow Jones Indices. By April 1 of this year, though, financial services companies accounted for 14.6 percent of all S&P 500 dividends.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
Yet the Federal Reserve has, until now, allowed the banks to continue paying dividends, despite being major, if indirect, beneficiaries of government bailouts of corporate America. Direct beneficiaries — companies that receive cash infusions from the Federal Reserve or the government — are coming under considerable pressure to avoid disbursing funds to shareholders, increasing the likelihood of further dividend cuts.
Despite dividends’ importance for many investors, and their hallowed status in traditional security analysis — Benjamin Graham, the guru of value investing, gave dividends great importance in evaluating the worthiness of companies — they are not universally regarded as fundamentally important in corporate finance.
In an influential 1961 paper, Merton Miller and Franco Modigliani , two Nobel laureates in economics, said that dividends were essentially irrelevant. Corporate earnings and cash flow are critically important, they said. But whether investors reap those rewards through dividends, stock price appreciation or buybacks is economically insignificant, their work suggested.
For one thing, Mr. Graham’s most important student, Warren Buffett, has never paid a dividend to his Berkshire Hathaway investors. As he explained in his 2013 letter to shareholders, he prefers to retain earnings within the company and use them to generate still greater earnings. If shareholders need money, he said, they can simply sell some of their shares.
“Above all, dividend policy should always be clear, consistent and rational,” he said. “A capricious policy will confuse owners and drive away would-be investors.”
His shareholders have benefited from the enormous return on Berkshire stock.
Investing in steady dividend-paying companies has not been a brilliant strategy over the last 30 years. The so-called Dividend Aristocrats, a group of companies within the S&P 500 that have increased dividends without fail for at least 25 years, have underperformed the overall S&P 500 in that period, according to Bloomberg data. So have investments in companies that pay especially large dividends.
The reason may be central to the very appeal of dividends. In order to supply a steady stream of income, these companies must reserve substantial sums that might otherwise be used for rapid growth. Of course, many companies now simply cannot grow rapidly. In such cases, they might as well funnel cash directly to shareholders, who could invest it in faster-growing firms.
That’s why I’m largely indifferent to dividends. As Mr. Buffett has shown, investors don’t really need them.
But it is terrible that dividends are drying up — along with so many other sources of cash — at a moment when many people need the money most. The lesson is that, in a crisis, dividends are not something you can really count on.
