better-than-expected start to the earnings season in the US, stock markets
Iran early in the month bumped oil prices up, but equity markets’ qualms over
was 2.5% higher than at the end of 2019, perhaps a sigh of relief at the
signing of the Sino-US Phase 1 trade agreement a couple of days earlier.
global equities reacted to news of the coronavirus outbreak in China. Investor
with the 2003 SARS epidemic.
by speculations about the direct effect on economic activity in China and Asia,
possible disruptions in production chains and trade, and how much all this
would knock economic agents’ confidence.
In the second half of January, the equity market fell almost without interruption, and steeply across Asian equities (Hong Kong in particular). In addition, the closing of Chinese markets for the Lunar New Year holidays limited visibility.
Fears that the epidemic would have a lasting impact on global economic growth also caused a drop in oil prices. WTI finished the month at USD 51.6 a barrel, down by 15.6% compared to the end of 2019.
Developed equity markets – slippage, not free-fall
Within developed markets, the major US indices fell only slightly, by
0.2% for the S& P500 and 1% for the Dow Jones 30. The Nasdaq even rose by
2% thanks to the good results of several iconic tech companies. The sharp
decline in the energy sector as oil prices fell and, to a lesser extent, in basic
materials and financial stocks, weighed on the overall market.
news published at the beginning of the month on Chinese exports, which were
encouraging for Asia as a whole. However, sectors whose activities relate to
international trade and travel encountered difficulties.
Eurozone equities fell by 2.8% (EuroStoxx 50 index) led by the significant fall in several cyclical sectors (basic materials, automobile construction) and banking stocks were hit by the further fall in long-term rates. The UK Footsie 100 lost 3.4% while the Swiss market remained resilient (+0.1% for the SMI).
in long-term interest rates. The yield on the 10-year US T-note, which stood at 1.92% at the end of 2019, ended
at a five-month low of 1.51%, a monthly easing of 41bp.
The yield on the German 10-year Bund ended the month at -0.43%, its lowest since mid-October. This 24bp monthly easing reflected the equity markets’ woes and concerns about global growth in connection with the coronavirus outbreak in China.
It was accentuated at the end of January by disappointments about eurozone GDP growth in the fourth quarter, particularly the slight contraction in activity in France.
The rise in government bonds did not do justice to the improvement in other economic indicators (business surveys and hard data on consumption and employment), which pointed to growth close to potential in 2020. The fall in interest rates was widespread.
The year began with the eruption of a dramatic and unpredictable event, one that was external to the economic and financial sphere. We had already stressed the importance of the politics as a market factor in this US election year and reiterated that the signing of Phase 1 of the Sino-US trade agreement would not mark the end of protectionist policies.
health emergency’ without recommending any travel or trade restrictions. Investors
fear the consequences for economic growth, Chinese and global, of a possible
coronavirus outbreak on activity and confidence, but the recent improvement in
economic data seems convincing to us for now.
We are likely to see large swings in equities over coming weeks but, given the good fundamentals of large economies and the still dovish attitude of major central banks, there could be buying opportunities.
For more articles by Nathalie Benatia, click here >
For more insights on market events, click here >
Any views expressed here are those of the author as of the date of publication, are based on available information, and are subject to change without notice. Individual portfolio management teams may hold different views and may take different investment decisions for different clients.
here are those of the author as of the date of publication, are based on
available information, and are subject to change without notice. Individual
investment decisions for different clients.
possible that investors will not recover their initial outlay.
to a higher-than-average volatility due to a high degree of concentration,
greater uncertainty because less information is available, there is less
