Richard Branson Celebrates Virgin Galactic's listing on the New York Stock Exchange.
How often do you wish you could go back in time and make what now appears to be an “obvious” investment in a transformational company or industry? It seems perfectly clear now that smartphones would become ubiquitous and allow Apple to become the world’s most valuable publicly traded company. You might say the same thing about cloud computing or internet retail, which made early and dedicated Amazon.com shareholders a lot of money.
Try looking up for the next theme: into space and the satellites orbiting there.
Now there is an exchange-traded fund that focuses on space — not merely on aerospace and defense contractors. The Procure Space ETF UFO,
, launched in April, invests in  companies around the world that are profiting from space now, as opposed to human space flight, which remains, for the most part, experimental. The fund is still tiny, with only $12.5 million in assets,  and has an expense ratio of 0.75%.
So space enthusiasts have something to celebrate. Then again, there’s no way of knowing whether an ETF focused on space will perform better than a broad index fund.There’s also no way to predict what long-term technological developments might disrupt the slew of satellite operators and service providers held by the ETF. Since UFO was established on April 11, it has returned 5.6%, trailing the S&P 500 index SPX,
Here’s the big-picture investment case: The global space industry’s revenue totaled nearly $415 billion in 2018, according to an estimate by the Space Foundation, a nonprofit advocacy and education group. Analysts at Bank of America Merrill Lynch have predicted that could balloon to a $2.7 trillion industry by 2045, amid more space startups and as more countries launch satellites and the cost of those launches decline. That would make for a compounded annual growth rate of just over 7%.
In an interview, ProcureAM CEO Andrew Chanin described the ETF’s strategy and discussed some of its holdings, including Richard Branson’s Virgin Galactic Holdings SPCE,
. The fund bought shares of  Virgin Galactic (which doesn’t expect to turn a profit until 2021 ) on Oct. 30, following the listing on the New York Stock Exchange on Oct. 28. The position makes up less than 2% of the portfolio.
Chanin called Virgin Galactic’s space tourism concept “interesting” and said he expected the company’s technology eventually to be “repurposed for point-to-point hypersonic travel.” Looking beyond the company’s current business model — taking passengers for suborbital sightseeing trips for $250,000 a pop — Chanin envisions quick trips from New York to Australia, for example.
Read: As Virgin Galactic shares debut, here are the billionaires leading the new space race
UFO is the first ETF with the word “space” in its name. The is not simply a marketing gimmick because the fund focuses on pure-play companies. It isn’t yet another aerospace and defense ETF holding major contractors, the largest of which is the $5.5 billion ishares U.S. Aerospace & Defense ETF ITA,
