But it was in America where the bounce was most vigorous. The Dow Jones had its biggest lift-off since June 2000, while the S&P 500 climbed 12.7 per cent, its largest monthly increase since January 1987, and its third-largest since World War II.
AJ Bell investment director Russ Mould says there are four main reasons why the US recovery was so substantial.
'The US authorities seem keen to end the lockdown pretty quickly and get America back to work as best they can,' he wrote.
Consequently, the government introduced stimulus measures worth the equivalent of about 20 per cent of GDP to try and prompt a recovery. The Federal Reserve cut interest rates and unleashed a vast amount of quantitative easing on the economy.
World stock markets 'monthly change in local currency terms since the start of last year.
How the FTSE 100 index has performed over the last three months.
The jolt this created led many investors, as the resulting market recovery took hold, to jump in. You could call this a herd mentality, or in contemporary parlance, 'Fomo' - fear of missing out, in this case on a stock market boom .
Some analysts are also predicting that a V-shaped recovery in corporate profits will start around the second half of the year.
Finally, a considerable portion of the S&P 500 index's gains is derived from technology stocks, which are doing fantastically well in this challenging environment.
People have been snapping up new apps they may have never, or only sparingly, used before the coronavirus hit us.
Online orders and deliveries have come into their own, creating in some cases supply bottlenecks and backlogs.
Is the Fomo rally the real deal or will shares dive again?
It’s been called the Fomo rally, as shares picked themselves up off the floor after a diabolical March and bear markets turned bullish.
The FTSE 100 bounced 23 per cent with theUK in lockdown. In the US, April was even more astonishing – the S&P 500 had its best month since 1987.
So, what’s going on? Is this the stock market signalling the start of a coronavirus recovery, or have investors merely been piling in driven by Fomo – the fear of missing out?
On this podcast, we look at the rally, what’s driving it and the history of false dawns in stock market crashes.
A glance at the top 100 performing Nasdaq stocks last month shows a proliferation of tech firms. Microchip Technology Inc, PayPal, Amazon, and Align Technology, which makes medical devices, are all in the top fifteen.
How the FTSE 100 index has performed over the last decade.
'Technology firms have been huge beneficiaries of the lockdown, as companies and people turn to digital services to carry on working and living their lives,' says Adrian Lowcock, the head of personal investing at Willis Owen.
Lowcock also points out that investors have moved to a more traditionally safe investment in this perilous economic time - gold. Eight of the top ten best-performing funds in April were either precious metals or gold portfolios.
This rush to gold may actually show that investors are more cautious about theimproved recovery than the numbers might suggest. In the UK, sentiment has , but the Footsie uplift was weaker than for the US indices.
Unlike the US stock market which is awash with tech giants, the FTSE 100 is heavily reliant on services, commodity and oil firms, which have behaved quite poorly this year.
Oil supermajors such as BP and Royal Dutch Shell have had a gruelling few months, with demand for petroleum plummeting and an oversupply of oil driving prices to prices that would have recently been unthinkable.
Richard Hunter of Interactive Investor, says the UK has that Britain has 'regained its unwanted position as one of the world market's largest regional 'underweights' because of the coronavirus'.
Added to the uncertainty over the country's future trading relationship with the European Union, 'when the shutters were all but brought down on the global economy, matters worsened'.
The government has said that Britain will not extend the deadline for agreeing on a possible trade deal. If this happens and no deal can be negotiated, then any possible further gains stemming from the market's promising April could be wiped out.
With the near-exception of the Nasdaq, stock markets in the UK and the US are still down compared to where they were at the start of 2020. And it is hard to say where they will be when 2021 kicks off.
Not least because the effects of the current crisis on the real economy and public finances are impossible yet to define clearly. The stock market can pre-empt the real economy by pricing in recovery from bad times - but only when it knows the extent of the bad times and the shape of the recovery.
'The truth is that no-one knows what is going to happen next,' remarks Russ Mould. 'The markets have swung from utter despair to greed very quickly, when perhaps the real state of affairs lies somewhere between the two.'
So whether the markets get better or worse, this is the wrong time for investors to be complacent. Because the most valuable commodities for them during this crisis may not be the value of their stocks, but perspective and humility.
