Reserve Bank governor Philip Lowe has urged bank bosses to keep lending, as he expresses fears of a second spike in unemployment when government assistance winds down after September 30.
Australian stocks slump 3pc; biggest fall in six weeks; snaps seven day winning streak
The Australian sharemarket suffered its biggest one day fall in six weeks as the Federal Reserve's wary economic outlook and commitment to near zero rates until 2023 unleashed a sell-off of value and cyclical stocks.
The S&P/ASX Index snapped a seven day winning streak, falling 187.8 points, or 3 per cent, to 5960.6 points. It was the biggest one day percentage fall since May 1.
Traders said the Fed's comments triggered a rotation away from cyclical and value stocks - which Australia has a weighty exposure to - and into growth stocks and defensives.
Sectors offering beaten down valuations and exposure to an economic rebound - such as banks and energy producers - have driven the 30 per cent-plus rally from the March lows.
Banks were singled out for some particularly harsh treatment as the Fed's outlook statements following the conclusion of its two day meeting caused the Australian yield curve to flatten as bond prices rose and yields fell.
Investors withdrew money from bank stocks on Thursday.
The 10-year bond yield fell 9.4 basis points to 0.92 per cent - the biggest one day fall in basis points since late March.
The yield curve - or difference in yields between 10 and two year bonds - fell to 63 basis points. The curve had been as steep as 78 basis points at the start of the week.
Bank stocks had rallied around 40 per cent off their March lows on growing hopes for an economic recovery.
But investors cashed in on those gains, with ANZ slumping 6.2 per cent to $19.47 and Westpac tumbling 6.1 per cent to $18.50. Commonwealth Bank fell 4.4 per cent and NAB retreated 5.4 per cent.
BHP was a key loser among resource stocks, falling 2 per cent to $36.76. Woodside was hammered 5.8 per cent to $22.56.
Gold miners were the stars of the session as the precious metal remained well bid above $US1700 an ounce. Newcrest Mining added 5.7 per cent to $30.40, Northern Star Resources charges 6.7 per cent higher, and Evolution Mining advanced 4.2 per cent.
JB Hi-Fi fell 4.2 per cent despite saying full year profit would grow between 20 per cent and 22 per cent compared to the same time last year. However, the retailer said it would take a $25 million writedown on its New Zealand business.
Kogan.com bucked the sell-off to rally 6.9 per cent after the online retailer cvompleted its $100 million placement. The proceeds will be used to fund acquisitions.
Tech stocks suffered the worst day in a month, with the S&P/ASX All Technology Index dropping 2.6 per cent. Afterpay fell 4.4 per cent and EML Payments tumbled 6.7 per cent.
Monash rides tech wave with EML, Afterpay
Monash Investors rode the tech rally through May , winning big on stocks such as Afterpay, Kogan.com and EML Payments, and it is now tipping Jumbo Interactive to shine in the coming months.
While the S&P/ASX Small Ordinaries Index fell 2.56 per cent through March, April and May, Monash delivered a 9.7 per cent return, shrugging off the market dip to gain 11.25 per cent for the financial year to date.
Monash Investors' co-founder Simon Shields says shares in Treasury Wine Estates are affected by changing tastes.
"We've gone through a very extreme period in the market," Monash co-founder Simon Shields said.
"Picking the right stocks was important but we found many cheap stocks. There was quite a dip in market prices which we took advantage of."
Monash had a 50 per cent cash weighting in early March, which was reduced to 34 by mid-March. At the start of May, its cash balance was as low as 2 per cent.
But some selling of key positions through the month saw its cash weighting rise to 9 per cent as it took profits on some of its best performing stocks.
Click here for more on the latest changes to Monash Investors' portfolio.
Former Federal Reserve economist Vincent Reinhart has spied what he considers two surprises from the US central bank's views on the economic outlook and monetary policy following the conclusion of its two day meeting.
Mr Reinhart, who is currently chief economist at BNY Mellon Investment Management, says despite Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell's earlier declaration that the recession will cast a long shadow on real economic growth, the FOMC did not move its longer-run assessments of real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and the equilibrium real fed funds rate.
Vincent Reinhart, former chief economist of the US Federal Reserve and now at BNY Mellon Investment Management.
"His rationale was that it is “way too early” to make such adjustments, and he hoped that well-designed policy could avoid much of those ill effects," Mr Reinhart says.
"Some of this might be about monetary policy, in that the distribution of the appropriate funds rate shifted inward, even as the median was unchanged."
Second, Mr Reinhart says the Fed rolled out the so-called 'dot plot' despite vice chairman Richard Clarida earlier saying that rate guidance might have to wait until September.
The dot plot suggests interest rates will remain near zero until 2023.
"The answer is that Powell’s committee holds a remarkable uniformity of views. All participants expect to keep policy on hold through the end of next year and all but two through 2013."
Broker Credit Suisse says COVID-19 is causing higher blood collection costs across CSL's US operating network.
CSL chief executive Paul Perreault.
The broker forecasts collection costs to rise 3.5 per cent in financial 2021 due to increased healthcare PPE and labour costs.
As a result it forecasts gross margins at its blood plasma business Behring to fall 1.3 per cent in financial 2021 to 58.5 per cent.
On the upside the broker notes demand for CSL's key products remains strong, including blood plasma.
"The IG [immunoglobulin] market was already tight pre-COVID-19 and CSL was able to achieve favourable price increases in 1H20," the broker wrote.
"With weaker industry plasma collection volumes during COVID-19, this is going to create an even tighter market over the next 6-9 months, in our view."
Credit Suisse tips CSL to grow earnings per share 15 per cent in financial 2021, which puts it on 38.9 times financial 2021's forecast earnings.
It has an outperform rating on shares, but trimmed its valuation $6 to $323.
S&P/ASX200 Index tumbles below 6000 points; Banks hammered; Bonds surge
The Australian sharemarket has tumbled below 6000 points, with traders saying the Federal Reserve's comments on the outlook for the US economy and interest rates has spurred a rotation out of cyclical and value stocks into defensive and growth stocks.
The S&P/ASX200 Index is down 156 points, or 2.5 per cent, to 5992.4, with the big four banks leading the decline after rallying 40 per cent from their March lows.
The Fed's cautious outlook on the economy and committment to low rates until 2023 has driven a flattening of the yield curve, which has weighed heavily on financials.
Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell dampened expectations for a rapid rebound in the world's most important economy after the coronavirus pandemic forced shutdowns that took the country from the lowest unemployment in 50 years to the highest in 90 years in the space of just two months.
"This is going to take a whole lot of time," he said.
US Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell has ignited a sell-off with his downbeat comments.
The Australian 10-year bond yield has tumbled 9.1 basis points to 92.7 basis points, the biggest single day fall in terms of basis points since March 30.
Traders say the Australian market is being hit because it has a higher exposure to value and cyclical stocks, with banks and energy among the sectors that have paced the 30 per cent plus rally since the market's low in March.
Westpac and ANZ are starring in the bank sector beatdown, with the lenders' shares sliding 5 per cent. Comonwealth Bank is down 3.6 per cent and NAB is 4.7 per cent lower.
The prospect of lower yields spurred a surge into US tech stocks overnight, which offer a combination of strenger earnings growth and defensive cash flows.
Every week brings with it another remarkable tale of retail exuberance.
This time it is the 800 per cent rise in the share price of Hertz, the car rental company that last month filed for bankruptcy.
Conventional wisdom would suggest the equity of a company that cannot repay its debt is worth nothing. But these are days where convention or wisdom are particularly unhelpful if you want to make quick profits in the market.
Retail investors are betting on bankrupt Hertz as a fast lane to wealth.
Hertz is one of five failed listed US companies that has doubled in a few days.
They have become the source of unbridled speculation as novice traders that can trade in small amounts for free use their ample time and limited funds to punt the market.
"While the company might be able to negotiate a deal to return from the dead, odds are that the equity is probably worth zero," said Singapore based fund manager Nick Ferres of Vantage Point.
Legal practice roll-up IPH Limited has got a tick of approval from Bell Potter for its latest acquisition of New Zealand-based law firm Baldwins Intellectual Property.
The price tag is $NZ7.9 million on an FY20 adjusted EV/EBITDA acquisition multiple of four times.
As a result of the deal Bell Potter has upgraded its earnings per share forecasts by 1.1 per cent and 1.3 per cent for financials 2021/2022.
For financial 2021 it's tipping an underlying net profit of $83.5 million on sales of $375.1 million. This should translate into dividends of 29.5 cents per share on earnings of 38.8 cents per share.
The broker says IPH has strong growth prospects in Australia and the Asia Pacific region via a growing market and potential for market share gains.
It upgraded its 12-month share price target 16 per cent to $8.50.
IPH shares are top of the S&P/ASX200 leaderboard at lunchtime, with a 5.8 per cent gain to $7.92.
Childcare operator G8 Education has flagged a writedown of up to $250 million after a review of its portfolio of centres in the wake of the COVID-19 scare.
The company's review involved an assessment of the likely slower recovery profile arising from COVID-19, which was then reflected in short to medium term cashflows and a reduction in carrying values.
$250 million - that's a big number.
The writedown of between $230 million and $250 million mainly relates to a reduction in the carrying value of intangible assets (mainly goodwill), and the "right of use" asset and tangible assets relating to a number of underperforming centres including some Greenfield centres.
G8 Education shares are trading 5.2 per cent lower at $1.
