Today, about 98% of Eurodollar futures are traded electronically on the CME Globex trading platform.
Denoted by the ticker symbol ES, E-mini S&P 500 futures are a great option if you want to add or manage your exposure to large-cap companies in the U.S. stock market. They give an efficient, liquid and cost-effective way to gain market exposure to the S&P 500 Index, which tracks 500 of the U.S. economy’s largest companies. Some of the benefits of ES futures include:
Crude oil futures are the most efficient way for you to trade the global oil markets. The NYMEX WTI — the most actively traded crude oil contract — trades close to 1.2 million contracts per day. To understand, 1 contract = 1,000 barrels and is valued at nearly $44,740. NYMEX WTI futures give you direct exposure to the global oil market — a great advantage over other ways to trade. You can trade crude oil futures if you fall in these 2 categories:
Hedger: You can use these futures to reduce the impact of potential adverse price changes on the value of your oil-related assets.
Speculator: You can use crude oil futures to express and seek to profit from your views of the direction of oil prices.
U.S. Treasury futures are an efficient way to trade the U.S. government bond market, which offers the greatest security and diversity among government bond markets worldwide. These deeply liquid futures provide efficient tools for potentially enhancing income, hedging interest-rate risk, spread trading, speculating on interest rates and adjusting portfolio duration.
You should trade Treasury futures for these reasons:
Micro E-mini futures are 1/10th the size of an E-mini contract. They give you a simple, cost-effective way to trade in the equity index markets. These futures manage your exposure to the 500 U.S. large-cap stocks. The benefits of trading these equity index futures include:
Before placing your first futures trade, you need to open an account with a registered futures broker who will maintain your account and guarantee trades. In the futures business, brokerage firms are known as either an introductory broker (IB) or a futures commission merchant (FCM). Securities brokers are also licensed to deal with futures. You’ll want to see whether your current broker provides this service.
Here are Benzinga’s suggestions for quality brokerages for futures trading. They offer the right combination of cost and service.
