Circulytics supports a company’s transition towards the circular economy, regardless of industry, complexity, and size. Going beyond assessing products and material flows, this company-level measuring tool reveals the extent to which a company has achieved circularity across its entire operations. It does this by using the widest set of indicators currently available: enablers and outcomes. Circulytics:
Measures a company’s entire circularity, not just products and material flows
Delivers unprecedented clarity about circular economy performance, opening up new opportunities to generate brand value with key stakeholders
The Circulytics indicators have been developed by the Foundation in collaboration with 13 Strategic Partners and member companies, and have been tested by over 30 companies during 2019. When creating Circulytics, we sought alignment with other circular economy related initiatives, which will be in ‘other tools’ as they become available.
Start your Circulytics journey by entering the details of the person who will be responsible for the reporting (company reporter) to the sign-up form below. If accepted, the reporter will receive a link to the Circulytics survey (powered by Qualtrics).
Once your reporter's details have been submitted, they will be provided with access and a secure link to the Circulytics survey platform, along with their unique log-in. After submitting the required qualitative and quantitative data in the survey platform, companies will receive a bespoke company scorecard, which features a comprehensive breakdown of their results and an overall circularity score . The insights generated in this scorecard help companies identify opportunities to design out waste, keep materials and products in use, and generate environmental benefits.
Please note that the Ellen MacArthur Foundation does not validate the submitted data, nor does it endorse companies which have received a score card.
We have detected that you are using an older browser. Please update to the latest version of Google Chrome , Mozilla Firefox or Microsoft Edge to improve your user experience.
If you are unable to upgrade your browser, please see our Technical FAQ page to get tips on how to improve your user experience.
