Sanjeev Zarbade, VP PCG Research, Kotak Securities: The US markets corrected sharply by 7 percent during the week on fears of a resurgence in COVID-19 cases. The BSE-30 Index declined 1.4 percent this week. Market mood was dampened by mounting COVID-19 cases, no immediate relief provided by Supreme Court on AGR dues and a pessimistic outlook by US Fed on recovery timelines.
Ajit Mishra, VP - Research, Religare Broking Ltd: It was a tough day for the traders as markets swung both ways but finally managed to end in the green. Weakness in global markets led a feeble start but gradual recovery in index majors not only helped the benchmark to recoup losses but also close around the day’s high. In line with the benchmark, the sectoral indices too traded volatile wherein auto, infra and realty posted decent gains while IT and media closed in the red.
It all started with the US Fed statement that the US economy would take longer than expected to recover which impacted the sentiments world over. However, the recovery in the market shows that participants are still buoyant on the growth prospects. Considering the present scenario, we advise not to go overboard and maintain a balanced approach.
Sumeet Bagadia, Executive Director, Choice Broking: Nifty scaled 9,950 again amid high volatility; M&M, Bajaj Finance, Hero MotoCorp were the top gainers while IndusInd Bank and Reliance Industries were the most active stocks. Among the sectors, the auto index jumped almost 3 percent while the midcap index gained a percent. IT and power stocks came under pressure.At Technical front, Nifty opened on gap down note at 9,561 and took support form it’s 21 DMA and showed smart recovery from the bottom and managed to close near 10,000 level at 9,972 level which points out strength in the index.
Momentum Indicator RSI reading at 59.62 with positive crossover which points out strength in the index. At present level index has having good support at 9,550 level while resistance comes at 10,100 levels.
Sugandha Sachdeva VP-Metals, Energy & Currency Research, Religare Broking: The likelihood of a possible second wave of the coronavirus infections in the US, along with the Fed’s grim growth outlook for the year has stoked risk aversion globally, and that has put pressure on the rupee. Still, the rupee is seen facing lot of resilience around 76.60 mark and could reverse this trend unless it does not fall below 76.60. It looks like the RBI is keen to maintain the rupee in a 75.50 to 76.00 band, and that should give rupee bulls some breather. We expect the rupee to trade in the 74.80 to 76.60 band in the near term.
Gaurav Ratnaparkhi, Senior Technical Analyst, Sharekhan by BNP Paribas: Nifty witnessed a huge gap down opening on account of the global cues. The index opened near its crucial short term moving averages, which attracted buying interest in the market. Consequently, the index saw steady recovery as the day progressed. The intraday recovery halted near the key hourly moving averages that restricted the index from climbing above the psychological mark of 10,000. The weekly chart is showing signs of weakness as the index has formed a bearish outside bar near the key weekly moving averages. Thus the recent high of 10,328 becomes a major hurdle for the Nifty. On the flip side, today's low of 9,544 will assume the role of a short term support.
Vinod Nair, Head of Research at Geojit Financial Services: A volatile day came to an end with the Nifty recovering around 300 points from the day’s low. The major contributor to this gain was Reliance Industries which was also supported by technical bullishness. Markets tracked the positive opening in the European markets, post the sell-off seen yesterday. Except for IT, which was impacted by H-1B visa news, all the other sectors traded positive. Broader markets also participated in today’s gains. Currently, market seem to be driven by global cues and stock specific action will be the norm.
Manish Hathiramani, proprietary index trader and technical analyst, Deen Dayal Investments: The key takeaway from today's trading day was that we did not breach the levels of 9,640 on closing basis. What was also important is that we went past 9,850 which was a resistance level. Next week is going to be a trend decider week - either we would achieve an upside target of 10,200-10,250 or go back down to test today's lows of 9,550-9,600.
Market at close: Benchmark indices witnessed a gap down opening on June 12 but recovered in the last hour of the day with Sensex is up 242.52 points or 0.72% at 33780.89, and the Nifty up 70.90 points or 0.72% at 9972.90. About 1224 shares have advanced, 1226 shares declined, and 150 shares are unchanged.
M&M, Bajaj Finance, Hero MotoCorp are the top gainers while IndusInd Bank and Reliance Industries are the most active stocks. Among the sectors, the auto index jumped almost 3 percent wile the midcap index gained a percent. IT and power stocks came under pressure.
