US markets have suffered their worst week since the global financial crisis of 2008, as fears over the impact of the coronavirus continued to grip investors.
The three main US indexes ended the week down 10% or more from last Friday, despite a last-minute rally in prices.
Earlier, the main European markets fell sharply, with London's FTSE 100 index down 3.2% for the day.
Investors are worried the coronavirus could spark a global recession.
The Dow settled 1.4% lower on Friday, recovering from earlier lows, while the S&P sank 0.8% and the Nasdaq was roughly flat.
Amid the sell-off, Federal Reserve chair Jerome Powell put out an unusual statement, saying the US central bank was "closely monitoring" developments.
"The fundamentals of the US economy remain strong. However, the coronavirus poses evolving risks to economic activity," he said. "We will use our tools and act as appropriate to support the economy."
Why should I care if share prices fall?
The news of more coronavirus cases, notably in Italy, has raised concerns of a much larger economic effect than previously expected.
Bank of England Governor Mark Carney on Friday warned the outbreak could lead to a downgrade of the UK's growth prospects.
Other countries are also reassessing their economic forecasts, as hundreds of firms warn of disruptions to their supply chains and a decline in consumer demand.
US tech giants Apple and Microsoft are among the companies that have said their business will be affected, while investment bank Goldman Sachs warned on Thursday that the coronavirus is likely to wipe out any growth in US company profits this year.
Shares in airlines have been especially hard-hit as travel bans are imposed and companies limit staff travel. On Friday, airline group IAG - which owns British Airways and Iberia - said its earnings had been affected by "weaker demand" as a result of the outbreak.
"A known unknown" is how one major company boss described the economic fallout of coronavirus to the BBC.
But what the markets have woken up to - perhaps belatedly - is that the disruption to the economic activity from coronavirus is wider, deeper and perhaps longer lasting than previously assumed.
As major outbreaks spring up outside China, it is clear that it is not just global supply chains but also demand from consumers that's suffering, as efforts to contain the virus keep them away from shops, bars and restaurants.
What is unknown is exactly how bad and how lasting the impact could be. But what is known is that this comes at an already tricky time for the global economy with Japan, Italy, China and the UK among those already seeing growth faltering.
As economists slash their growth forecasts, policymakers are debating how much they can do to help, given how low interest rates remain. What's entirely clear is that investors face more anxiety ahead.
Mayank Mishra, a strategist at Standard Chartered Bank, said: "Previously the market had taken some comfort in the falling infection rates in China as a result of containment measures put in place earlier.
"But the spread of the coronavirus infection outside China, with clusters emerging in South Korea, Italy and Japan, has increased concerns significantly."
