A surge of risky borrowing by companies around the world leaves the global economy especially exposed to the potential costs of the outbreak.
This week’s plunge in oil prices drove down the share prices of highly indebted energy companies, illustrating the risks posed by years of heavy borrowing.Credit...Mark Abramson for The New York Times
LONDON — To grasp why the most important central banks — from the Fed to the Bank of England to the Bank of Japan — are now leaping into action as if the world were on fire, it helps to examine the subject of corporate debt.
For years, wonks bearing spreadsheets have warned that corporations around the planet were developing a dangerous addiction to debt. Interest rates were so low that borrowing money was essentially free, enticing companies to avail themselves with abandon. Something bad was bound to happen eventually, leaving borrowers struggling to make their debt payments. Lenders would grow agitated, tightening credit for everyone. The world would confront a fresh crisis.
Something bad is now happening. As the coronavirus outbreak spreads, halting factories from China to Italy , sending stock markets plunging and prompting fears of a worldwide recession , historic levels of corporate debt threaten to intensify the economic damage. Companies facing grave debt burdens may be forced to cut costs, laying off workers and scrapping investments, as they seek to avoid default.
“We have been always saying that we are sitting on top of an unexploded bomb, but we don’t know what is going to trigger it,” said Emre Tiftik, director of Research for Global Policy Initiatives at the Institute of International Finance, a Washington-based financial industry trade group. “Can the coronavirus be a trigger? We don’t know. Maybe.”
By the end of 2019, total outstanding debt among corporations other than financial institutions had surged to a record $13.5 trillion worldwide, according to a recent report by Serdar Çelik and Mats Isaksson for the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the Paris-based research institution. That number has swelled as many companies have sold riskier bonds to finance expansions.
Worries about corporate debt appear to be enhancing the panic that has captured world markets , as investors have dumped riskier assets like stocks in favor of safer holdings like United States government bonds.
This was especially vivid on Monday, as markets plunged in reaction to word that Saudi Arabia was driving oil prices lower . Many energy companies are dependent on riskier bonds. For them, lower oil prices translate into lower earnings. They may be forced to cut costs through layoffs or diminished investments to find cash to make their debt payments.
Concern about corporate borrowing also helps explain why the U.S. Federal Reserve last week opted to drop interest rates , and why the European Central Bank is expected to follow suit on Thursday. Lower interest rates limit debt payments for companies that might otherwise fall into trouble.
The concern about the magnitude of corporate debt is an outgrowth of how the world reacted to the financial crisis in 2008. Central banks from the United States to Europe to Japan pushed interest rates to zero and below, spurring companies to borrow and invest.
That approach ended the emergency, but also removed a source of market discipline: It diminished the risk of relying on debt.
Stock prices around the world plunged on Monday as news spread that Saudi Arabia planned to try to drive oil prices lower. In some places, like Kuwait, shares fell so much that trading was temporarily halted.Credit...Noufal Ibrahim/EPA, via Shutterstock
Since 2008, corporations worldwide have issued about $1.8 trillion in new bonds each year, a pace roughly double the previous seven years, according to the O.E.C.D. Bond sales slowed in the latter half of 2018, as central banks lifted rates. But as central banks last year lowered rates anew, the debt binge resumed.
The International Monetary Fund last year examined the situation in eight countries including the United States, Japan, China and several European nations. It warned that a shock only half as severe as the global financial crisis would put nearly 40 percent of total corporate debt at risk, meaning that companies would not be able cover their payments with earnings alone.
Not everyone is sounding the alarm. “The prophets of doom who thought that more debt was more risk have generally been wrong for the last 12 years,” said Nicolas Véron, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington. “More debt has enabled more growth, and even if you have a bit more volatility, it’s still net positive for the economy.”
In contrast to the financial crisis of 2008, few today are worried about the banking system, which holds capital to cover bad loans. The best-financed companies like Apple, Google and Facebook have hundreds of billions of dollars in cash, making them essentially immune to whatever reckoning may lie ahead.
But even some who praise central banks for rescuing the world from catastrophe argue that easy money has outlived its usefulness. Years of loose credit have enabled weak companies to stave off extinction.
“There are whole sectors that survived that should have gone into restructuring,” said Alberto Gallo, head of macro strategies at Algebris Investments, an asset management firm in London. “Retailers in a world of online retail, energy companies with high production costs, small banks in Europe that are not efficient. The availability of funding at very cheap rates has kept zombie companies alive. This means we have an accumulated level of fragility in the economy which can be exposed very easily to real shocks.”
As the coronavirus has spread from Asia to Europe to North America, it has threatened the earnings of companies that have financed their businesses by selling riskier bonds.
As Italy closed itself off to fight the virus, trams in normally bustling cities like Milan were left nearly empty. Companies that rely on Italy for sales appear especially vulnerable.Credit...Alessandro Grassani for The New York Times
The world of bonds can be roughly divided into two realms — those that gain the stamp of approval from credit rating agencies as investment grade, and those deemed to be less secure, bearing so-called junk status. Since 2010, about one-fifth of new corporate bond issuances have been below investment grade, according to the O.E.C.D. Last year, that proportion grew to one-fourth. “Default rates in a future downturn are likely to be higher than in previous credit cycles,” the report said.
Even within the sturdier category, bond markets have taken a pronounced turn toward risk: Last year, 51 percent of all outstanding investment-grade bonds were rated at BBB, the lowest level to qualify for that status, according to the O.E.C.D. That was up from 39 percent before the financial crisis.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
That trend is troubling to financial experts because it leaves companies — and the world economy — especially vulnerable to a change in fortunes.
The world’s largest pools of money — asset managers that control pension funds, mutual fund operators, and insurance companies — are typically restricted in where they can invest. Many are obligated to hold the safest bonds.
When corporate bottom lines are threatened, credit ratings can be downgraded. Given that more than half of all investment-grade bonds now occupy the lowest rung of that classification, downgrades could render trillions of dollars’ worth of such holdings effectively radioactive. Money managers would be forced to unload them while buying safer assets. That would make credit tighter for many companies, threatening some with insolvency and constraining economic growth.
This was the situation before the coronavirus began its lethal, wealth-destroying wander around the globe. The widespread disruption to factories across Asia and in Europe, the effective quarantining of all of Italy , and the spread of the outbreak to the United States have threatened the earnings of thousands of companies.
Last month, Kraft Heinz, the maker of ketchup and other processed foods, had its debt slashed to junk status. Macy’s, the department store giant, as well as the carmakers Ford and Renault, have also suffered downgrades.
Fitch Ratings, the credit rating agency, last week said that one-fourth of the corporate bonds it tracks in Europe have been issued by companies impeded by government actions meant to limit the spread of the virus, like travel restrictions and bans on public gatherings.
Apple and the other giant, best-financed companies hold hundreds of billions of dollars in cash, making them essentially immune to whatever reckoning may lie ahead.Credit...Nicolas Asfouri/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Companies dependent on Italy appear especially vulnerable.
Poste Italiana oversees mail delivery while also selling financial, insurance and telecommunications services. The company’s debt is rated BBB. No great powers of imagination are required to grasp that the sequestration of the nation is going to stop customers from reaching post offices.
“We’re going to look at all cost-reduction measures,” the company’s chief executive, Matteo Del Fante, said in a recent presentation to analysts.
Before the outbreak arrived in Europe, CNH Industrial, which makes machinery for construction and agriculture, was cutting expectations for earnings, citing weak demand in North and South America. As of the end of 2019, it carried debt of nearly $25 billion. Its bonds are mostly rated BBB, and Italy is the source of one-tenth of it sales. Those facts seemed unlikely to bolster confidence.
History shows that perilous pressures can build for years inside major economies without disaster unfolding. Danger signs frequently turn out to be benign. Perhaps the wave of corporate borrowing will subside without a traumatic event to right the balance.
But if a nasty reassessment of risk lies ahead, bringing an economic crisis, the coronavirus outbreak could be the event that sets it in motion.
“This is exactly the type of thing that can trigger a chain reaction,” said Sonja Gibbs, managing director of Global Policy Initiatives at the Institute of International Finance. “The vulnerability in the corporate debt market has been building up for a very long time.”
