Investors are posting multimillion-dollar gains from Moderna's soaring stock price, profiting from the company's bid to offer    a coronavirus vaccine.
Moderna spiked 30% between Monday and Tuesday's trading    sessions. The biotech firm was one of the few US stocks to post    major gains while the broader market slumped on intensifying    outbreak concerns.
Here are the top 10 Moderna shareholders and how much    they profited from the two-day rally, ranked in ascending    order.
Investors are pulling in hundreds of millions of dollars worth of  gains from soaring biotech stocks as the race for coronavirus  drugs intensifies.
Drug developer Moderna spiked 30% between Monday and Tuesday's  trading sessions, beating out a plunging market by shipping the  first coronavirus vaccine for human testing. The firm submitted  vials of mRNA-1273 for phase one trials in the US just 42 days  after identifying the key RNA sequence to target, according to a  Monday press release.
Moderna shares gained 2% on Monday as the broader market slumped  the most in two years. The biotech company soared as much as 43%  in Tuesday's session before paring some gains.
Moderna's stock jump arrived one day after biotech company Gilead  notched a similar uptick. The firm soared as much as 11% Monday  after a World Health Organization official said its remdesivir  compound could be the best bet for treating coronavirus cases.  Gilead's drug is undergoing human trials in China, with results  expected to be released in April.
Here are the top 10 shareholders to ride Moderna's two-day stock  rally, ranked in ascending order of profit. Gain figures are  calculated from the spike between February 21's close and the  closing price on February 25. Holdings data are sourced from  Bloomberg.
About: Bancel serves as the biotech company's  CEO and as a venture partner for Flagship Pioneering, the firm  that founded Moderna. He previously acted as CEO at French  diagnostics company bioMérieux and at Eli Lilly and Company.
About: Bancel serves as the majority equity  holder and sole managing member of OCHA. The CEO has previously  used the LLC to buy Moderna stock.
About: Boston Biotech Ventures serves as another  holding firm for Bancel to buy and sell Moderna shares.
About: TAS serves as a holding company for Dr.  Timothy Springer and Dr. Chafen Lu. Springer has helped several  young biotech companies get off the ground, and was among  Moderna's biggest shareholders before its initial public  offering.
About: A scientist, inventor, chemical engineer,  and professor at MIT, Langer serves on Moderna's board of  directors. He has helped found several other biotech firms, both  on his own and in partnership with venture capital firm Polaris  Partners.
About: BlackRock holds Moderna shares across  several investment products. Moderna is the highest-weighted  company in BlackRock's iShares Genomics Immunology and Healthcare  ETF.
About: Fidelity holds millions of shares of  Moderna through the numerous index funds it offers to clients.
About: Investment adviser giant Vanguard holds  millions of Moderna shares through several of its funds,  including its Total Stock Market Index Fund, Small-Cap ETF, and  Extended Market ETF.
About: AstraZeneca and Moderna announced an  exclusive partnership to develop messenger RNA therapeutics in  2013 for numerous serious diseases and cancers. AstraZeneca made  an upfront investment of $240 million for exclusive access to  targeting specific diseases through the therapeutics.
About: A well-known healthcare venture capital  fund, Flagship Pioneering founded Moderna in 2010. The biotech  company's CEO joined Flagship in 2013 and serves as a venture  partner.
Now read more markets coverage from Markets Insider  and Business Insider:
