How do you invest in the time of the coronavirus? Probably not passively.
When Warren Buffett announced at Berkshire Hathaway’s annual meeting last weekend that he had dumped all his airline holdings -- $US6 billion ($9.5 billion) worth of stocks – it was, according to CNBC’s idiosyncratic sharemarket expert Jim Cramer, a wake-up call for investors in index funds.
"Buying America": Warren Buffett dumped airline stocks but disagrees violently with the notion that index investing is dead.
Buffett once described the late Jack Bogle , who founded money manager Vanguard Group and pioneered index investing in the 1970s, as the person who had done the most for American investors.
"A lot of Wall Street is devoted to charging a lot for nothing," Buffett said. "He charged nothing to accomplish a huge amount."
'Buying the index' has, for much of the past decade, been the most cost-efficient way to get exposure to a sharemarket that from March 2009 to mid-February this year soared about 350 per cent.
It’s also become the most popular way for ordinary investors to get that exposure. There’s more money invested in index funds than with active, stock-picking asset managers. Last year it was estimated there was about $US4.3 trillion in such funds.
COVID-19 presents a challenge for investors unlike anything previously experienced.
While Buffett himself says he would "disagree violently" with the notion that index-investing is dead – he likens index-investing to "buying America" and has directed in his will that his widow's funds should be 90 per cent invested in index vehicles – he also said at the weekend that, while investors should bet on America, they had to be careful about how they bet.
COVID-19 presents a challenge for investors unlike anything previously experienced.
The pandemic's impacts are wide-spread but uneven and intense. While whole economies have been locked down, sectors of them have been far more acutely affected than others.
As economies re-open, some sectors will be able to gradually return to business as normal (or as normal as life and business will be until an effective vaccine is found). Others will languish for a lot longer and some will be permanently adversely affected and changed.
The airline stocks that Buffet dumped had suffered 60 to 70 per cent plunges in their share prices.
Airlines are, of course, among the worst-affected by the pandemic as both domestic and international travel was halted, abruptly.
While in some markets domestic flights might cautiously resume, the resumption of international travel in any volume is a long way off and the pandemic will alter, permanently or at least for the foreseeable future, the economics of aviation.
The most intense impacts of the coronavirus aren’t confined to airlines. Anything travel or leisure-related or discretionary – hotels, casinos, car rentals, restaurants, cinemas, some retail and even toll roads -- is being hit hard, and most of those sectors will remain wounded for quite some time to come. The oil sector is, of course, a special and most severe case.
The experience of even those apparently benefiting from the pandemic [...] argues against a blanket approach to investing.
The S&P500 index peaked in February this year before slumping 34 per cent between February 19 and March 23. It has subsequently (some would say irrationally, others might attribute it to the continuing flows of funds into the market from index and exchange-traded funds ) bounced 28 per cent, but remains about 15 per cent off that February record.
Our market here in Australia slumped 36 per cent between February and March and has since gained about 18 per cent, but remains 25 per cent off its February high.
The difference in performance between the markets – and an indication of why passive investing may not be the best strategy in a pandemic -- appears to be the big tech stocks in the US. The "FAANG+" index of big tech stocks (Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix, Google etc) was down 34 per cent between February and March but bounced 36 per cent and is only about 10 per cent off its February level.
That’s despite the reality that companies like Amazon – or Woolworths and Coles in this market – may be experiencing massive spikes in sales but are also incurring massive increases in coronavirus-related costs.
Amazon last week reported a 26 per cent surge in March quarter sales, but a 29 per cent slump in earnings and warned that it might incur a loss this quarter because of $6 billion in coronavirus-related costs. Woolworths’ Brad Banducci flagged an increase in costs of between $220 million and $275 million for his group in the June quarter.
The experience of even those apparently benefiting from the pandemic could be regarded as a reason for staying clear of the market entirely, but it certainly argues against a blanket approach to investing.
That’s not a bad development. Passive investing – index funds and exchange-traded funds – had grown to the point where they accounted for close to half the activity in the US equity markets, raising the question of whether markets were being driven more by momentum and the weight of inflows into passive investing vehicles than by market fundamentals.
Bogle, who died last year, said himself that if everyone index-invested it would lead to "chaos" and "catastrophe" and markets would fail. There’s nothing wrong with a bit of a reality check.
The average active fund manager underperforms their benchmark indices. Once the pandemic has passed, and the worst of the damage to the worst-affected companies and sectors is behind them, the advantages for individual investors that index funds have over the average active managers – lower management, transaction costs and taxes – will reassert themselves.
