Dow extends win streak to four sessions, as investors look forward to easing of coronavirus lockdowns
The Dow scored its fourth straight session of gains Monday, as several countries and U.S. states began to ease their coronavirus lockdowns or outlined plans to moderate restrictions. Investors also  braced for a deluge of first-quarter earnings reports and tracked continued weakness in crude oil.
climbed 95.64 points, or 1.1%, closing at 8,730.16.
Major U.S. stock benchmarks fell last week . The Dow saw a 1.9% weekly decline to end Friday at 23,75.27, while the S&P 500 gave up 1.3% to close at 2,836.74. The Nasdaq Composite gave up just 0.2% last week to finish Friday at 8,634.52.
, which tracks smaller U.S. businesses, booked larger gains Monday than the three major indexes, adding 48.86 points, or 4%, to end at 1,281.88.
The states of Georgia, Oklahoma and Alaska started loosening restrictions on businesses despite warnings from public-health experts that such moves could be premature. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said the state will likely begin to reopen the economy in certain areas “with certain precautions after May 15.”
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said he expected the U.S. economy to bounce back in the months after June, once the lockdowns are dismantled.
“People are now realizing we could open sooner, and we could get things going again. Maybe this will prove to be a temporary blip. Markets are forgiving of those kind of blips, but so much if this ends up becoming a longer-term issue,” Joe Saluzzi, co-manager of trading at Themis Trading, told MarketWatch.
was down well below 40. The index traces the implied measure of the S&P 500’s volatility over the past 30 days, and was down 7.4% Monday near 33.29.
“It’s a sign that maybe things can calm down a little from here,” said Saluzzi.
Children in Spain were allowed outdoors for the first time in six weeks if accompanied by an adult on Sunday and the government plans to allow residents to leave their homes for walks and exercise starting May 2. Italy and Belgium laid out plans to begin easing some restrictions on May 4, while France aims to begin easing its lockdown on May 11.
But the busiest week of corporate earnings season also has kicked off, with results expected to reflect the damage and uncertainty spawned by the pandemic.
“I think the news will continue to be negative,” Christopher O’Keefe, managing director at Logan Capital Management, told MarketWatch. “You’ll probably see more companies deciding to eliminate guidance for the year, because they just don’t know. And you’ll probably see more omissions of dividends.”
There are 149 S&P 500 companies and 12 components of the Dow scheduled to deliver results this week. Among the heavyweights, tech giants Apple Inc. AAPL,
So far, 122 members of the S&P 500 have already posted first-quarter numbers, with earnings down by 22.7% in aggregate. FactSet’s blended estimate, combining already reported results and estimates for the rest, projects only muted improvement of a 16% earnings drop once all results are tallied.
Investors were shaking off further weakness in oil futures on Monday. Oil’s collapse last week, including a plunge into negative territory for an expiring Nymex West Texas Intermediate crude contract, was blamed for dragging down equities last week and underlines the hit to demand from the pandemic.
See: Could the crude oil market bust spell trouble for highflying U.S. stocks?
The week ahead also will see a meeting of Federal Reserve policy makers. Monday afternoon, the central bank said it was expanding its $500 billion Municipal Liquidity Facility , to include debt issued by smaller cities and counties and to finance them for longer than the initial facility allowed .
Analysts initially expected there to be little scope for additional near-term action given the substantial monetary easing and other stimulus efforts already undertaken by the central bank.
What companies were in focus?
said it would suspend its dividend and stock repurchases to preserve cash. The car maker’s shares gained 2.3%, after trading down earlier in the session.
Luckin Coffee Inc. US:LK shares were in focus after the Wall Street Journal reported that a Chinese regulator was investigating the Chinese coffee chain and had demanded access to the company’s accounts. This comes after the company reported to investors that a large chunk of its 2019 sales were fabricated.
