Inside the mind of a cop: Shoot or don't shoot?
The now-fired Atlanta Police officer who faces a felony murder charge for fatally shooting Rayshard Brooks last week kicked the 27-year-old man after he fell to the ground, Fulton County's district attorney said Wednesday.
DA Paul Howard announced 11 charges against Garrett Rolfe, who five days ago fired three shots at Brooks, two of which hit Brooks in the back and another that hit a car with three people inside.
After Rolfe shot Brooks, he exclaimed, "I got him," kicked Brooks as he struggled for his life, and failed to give timely first aid, Howard said.
Asked by a reporter about new details revealed by the district attorney, Tomika Miller, Brooks' widow, began to cry and said, "I was very hurt. ... I felt everything that he felt just by hearing what he went through. And it hurt. It hurt really bad."
"Fearing for his safety, and the safety of the civilians around him, Officer Rolfe dropped his taser and fired his service weapon at the only portion of Mr. Brooks that presented to him -- Mr. Brooks' back," a statement released by the LoRusso Law Firm says.
Attorneys for Rolfe said their client immediately called for emergency medical services and began rendering aid to Brooks.
Devin Brosnan, the other officer at the shooting, faces an aggravated assault charge for standing on Brooks in the parking lot.
This still image taken from a bystander's video shows former officer Garrett Rolfe kick Rayshard Brooks after he was shot, according to Fulton County District Attorney Paul Howard.
The killing Friday night came amid nationwide protests calling for an end to racism and police violence against black people. Atlanta Police Chief Erika Shields stepped down from her position in the wake of the killing.
Another demonstration was taking place Wednesday at the Wendy's where Brooks was shot, with dozens of protesters gathered and some blocking the road.
Hours after the district attorney's announcement, Atlanta police officers were not responding to calls in three of the city's six zones, multiple sources within Atlanta Police Department told CNN's Ryan Young.
The department denied the reports of officers walking off the job, saying there was a high number of call-outs on the incoming shift.
"We have enough resources to maintain operations & remain able to respond to incidents," Atlanta police tweeted.
Earlier suggestions that multiple officers from each zone had walked off the job were inaccurate. The department is experiencing a higher than usual number of call outs with the incoming shift. We have enough resources to maintain operations & remain able to respond to incidents.
— Atlanta Police Department (@Atlanta_Police) June 18, 2020
The demeanor after the shooting "did not reflect any fear or danger of Mr. Brooks, but reflected other kinds of emotions," Howard said.
Brosnan has agreed to be a state's witness, Howard said -- a statement disputed by the officer's attorneys.
"To be clear, there is no agreement that our client is going to testify at any hearing," lawyer Amanda Clark Palmer told CNN's Chris Cuomo. There's no need for a plea deal, she said. "In my view, he doesn't need a deal. He shouldn't have been charged with a crime in the first place. ... He is not a state's witness. He is a witness."
She said her client shouldn't have been charged with aggravated assault because "an assault puts somebody in fear of immediately receiving a violent bodily injury. That wasn't Devin's intent."
Attorney Don Samuel said Brosnan wasn't sure who was shooting and the officer put his foot on Brooks' arm for less than 10 seconds to make sure he couldn't get access to a weapon.
Samuel said the district attorney's timeline is wrong and that the officers were giving aid soon after they checked Brooks for where he had been hit.
Garrett Rolfe, left, was charged with felony murder, and Devin Brosnan was charged with aggravated assault in the shooting death of Rayshard Brooks.
Arrest warrants have been issued for Rolfe and Brosnan and they were asked to surrender by Thursday evening. With the felony murder charge, Rolfe could face the death penalty if convicted.
Miller said she hopes everything in the case falls into place like it should.
"I'm really hurt. Father's Day is coming up and all I can do is just think about what if my husband were still here," she said in a brief statement to reporters.
The incident began when police responded to a report of a man sleeping in his car in the fast-food restaurant's drive-thru lane. After chatting calmly with the officers and failing a Breathalyzer test, Brooks resisted when officers moved to handcuff him for suspected drunken driving.
Video footage shows the three fighting on the ground before Brooks grabs an officer's Taser and begins to run away. As an officer chases him, Brooks points the Taser over his shoulder at Rolfe, who then shoots him multiple times, the surveillance video shows. Brooks died at a hospital.
Officer Devin Brosnan is seen in this still image standing on Rayshard Brooks after he was shot, Fulton County District Attorney Paul Howard said.
The 11 charges Rolfe faces are felony murder, five counts of aggravated assault, four counts of violation of oath of office and one count of criminal damage to property.
Brosnan also faces two counts of violation of oath of office.
