High-profile ethical exchange traded funds (ETFs) have been caught holding Wirecard , the German payments company which collapsed on Thursday after revelations of accounting fraud.
Wirecard has had governance problems for years. Yet some ETFs that buy companies with strong environmental and social governance credentials (ESG) continued buying its shares.
In Australia, the Vanguard Ethically Conscious International Shares Index ETF (ASX: VESG), which aims to avoid buying companies dogged by “severe controversies”, holds Wirecard. The fund houses $115 million of Australian investors’ money.
In the United States, where the ETF market is far larger, Wirecard is held by the iShares ESG MSCI EAFE ETF, which houses $3.6 billion and is listed on the Nasdaq exchange.
These ETFs bought Wirecard because it was included in the list of companies – known as an index – that they follow. Most ETFs simply follow an index. They do not hire active money managers to pick stocks.
Vanguard says Wirecard was just one of more than 1500 shares held by its ethical fund. The fund had returned 16.35 per cent over the year to end-May, it said, adding: “When companies fail, either through mismanagement or poor governance that has gone undetected, diversification provides an excellent protection.”
For many, scandals like Wirecard raise serious questions about whether ETFs are the right tool for ethical investing, and whether investors wanting more ethical outcomes are better off hiring an active manager.
Tracey McNaughton, chief investment officer at wealth manager Escala Partners, says ESG is an area where active managers can help. “When it comes to ESG, we always prefer active,” she says, adding that index providers “could have flagged governance issues” with Wirecard sooner.
A strength of active management, she believes, is that there is more accountability. If an ethical fund manager is found to be buying shares in a shifty business, they can be "called into meeting rooms and held accountable", she says. By contrast ETFs that mechanically follow indexes take less personal responsibility.
While getting caught holding Wirecard may seem damning, there are factors that count in favour of the index-tracking approach used by ESG ETFs. Among the foremost is transparency.
Transparency has become highly prized by investors since the 2008 financial crisis, much of which was blamed on opaque debt instruments like collateralised debt obligations.
Index ETFs are totally transparent. Their websites publish every share that they own every day. If investors see an ETF holds a company they dislike, they can choose not to buy it.
Active managers are not averse to scooping up scandal-ridden stocks. The classic example is Enron, the American energy trading business that cooked its books. As Enron’s accounting frauds were steadily exposed, active managers continued to buy its shares, believing the statements made by Enron’s bosses that governance was improving.
Geoff Warren, a professor of finance at the ANU, says that transparency and low costs count in favour of ethical ETFs. They can also provide other, subtler, benefits like reducing “career risk” for financial advisers. Advisers are coming under pressure from some clients, he says, to offer ethical investment options. And ESG ETFs can help showcase to clients that they are taking action.
He believes, however, that it's best for ethically motivated investors to engage with businesses directly. He says: “It is debatable how much you can make the world better by removing companies from your portfolio. You are better off buying the companies and working with them.
"If you just dodge them, they can just end up with other investors who might not care about ESG, who just buy it cheaper and may make a higher return. If you’re serious about ESG there has to be stewardship with direct engagement.”
David Tuckwell is the editor of ETF Stream.
