LONDON'S blue-chip index fell for a second straight day on Tuesday, falling 100 points, a similar theme across European markets.
The FTSE-100 opened lower for a second consecutive day this morning, and continued to fall as markets respond to cuts from British American Tobacco (BAT). The blue-chip FTSE 100 declined 0.5 percent and at 9.45am the index was down 123.32 at 6349.27. European markets also had a bleak morning, as shares fell in response to BAT.
The pan-European STOXX 600 index fell 1.3 percent, with eurozone banks down 5.6 percent after a six-day run of gains.
Shares in oil majors Royal Dutch Shell, BP and Total fell between 3.2 percent and 4.7 percent as crude prices pulled back on the spectre of persistent oversupply.
BAT slid 3.5 percent on the FTSE-100 after it cut annual targets, citing a demand hit from stricter lockdown measures in key emerging markets.
FOLLOW OUR LIVE UPDATES HERE:
FTSE 100 live: Global stocks extended gains (Image: GETTY)
Analysts say a Democratic victory in November could throw into doubt policies favoured by Wall Street (Image: GETTY)
US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on Tuesday chided British bank HSBC for backing moves by China to end Hong Kong's autonomy, saying such "corporate kowtows" got little in return from Beijing.
Mr Pompeo said the United States stood ready to help Britain with alternatives after Beijing reportedly threatened to punish HSBC and break commitments to build nuclear power plants in the country unless it allowed China's Huawei Technologies to build its 5G network.
US financial market operators, including the New York Stock Exchange, held a moment of silence on Tuesday in honor of George Floyd, a 46-year-old African American who died on May 25 after a white police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes.
The floor of the NYSE, which is owned by Intercontinental Exchange Inc, went silent for 8 minutes and 46 seconds at noon, coinciding with the beginning of Floyd's funeral in Houston and the amount of time the officer's knee was on Floyd's neck.
NYSE President Stacey Cunningham said in a livestreamed interview with Axios: "There is no place for racial injustice across corporate America, our communities, our individuals, and we really need to highlight that."
Exchange operators Nasdaq Inc, Cboe Global Markets Inc and IEX Group also each held a moment of silence at noon in honor of Floyd, whose death prompted protests around the globe.
8.22pm update: Dow decline after recent gains; Nasdaq hits 10,000
The S&P 500 and Dow fell on Tuesday after recent strong gains, while the Nasdaq extended its record run and briefly rose above the 10,000 mark for the first time.
Investors eyed this week's Federal Reserve meeting.
While no major policy announcements are expected when the US central bank wraps up its two-day meeting on Wednesday, investors will scrutinize its remarks on the health of the economy, which has been reopening after coronavirus-related closures.
The benchmark S&P 500, which erased its losses for the year on Monday, is about 5% below its own all-time high.
The US presidential election is re-emerging as a potential risk to markets after a shift in polls that has seen President Donald Trump lose ground to Democrat Joe Biden.
Concerns over election-fueled volatility have regained prominence in recent weeks, even as broader market swings have subsided and stocks have surged.
Futures on the Cboe Volatility Index, known as Wall Street's "fear gauge," show a visible bump in volatility expectations near the election.
Contributing to investors' election concerns are polls showing that Trump's standing among voters has eroded amid criticism over his handling of the coronavirus pandemic as well as the protests sparked by the killing of George Floyd in police custody.
A Democratic victory could threaten policies championed by Trump and generally favored by Wall Street, including lower corporate tax rates and fewer regulations, analysts have said.
Market experts at BofA Global Research said in a recent note to clients: "A potential victory by Joe Biden ... and to a greater extent, a 'Democratic sweep,' are generally considered more market-unfriendly outcomes."
6.28pm update: London stocks end lower as HSBC, British American Tobacco weigh
London's bluechip index slid on Tuesday, weighed down by forecast cuts from British American Tobacco, while HSBC dropped after a leading shareholder said it was uneasy over the company's decision to back a new security law in Hong Kong.
HSBC fell 3.6 percent and was the biggest weight on the FTSE 100 index after Aviva Investors, a top-20 investor in both the bank and peer Standard Chartered , raised concerns over their support for the law.
The blue-chip FTSE 100 declined 2.1 percent, with cigarette maker British American Tobacco Plc falling 3.1 percent after it flagged a demand hit due to prolonged lockdowns in South Africa and Mexico and weak sales in Bangladesh and Vietnam.
The British mid-cap index declined 2.1 percent, weighed down by major industrials and real estate stocks.
The US presidential election is becoming a potential risk to markets as Biden gains ground in the polls (Image: GETTY)
Emirates workforce is set to shrink by almost a third (Image: GETTY)
Banks and oil companies led European stocks lower on Tuesday as investors turned wary ahead of the US Federal Reserve's policy meeting.
The pan-European STOXX 600 index fell 1.2 percent, while the main markets in Frankfurt, London and Paris were down between 1.6 percent and 2.1 percent.
After a stunning 46 percent recovery from all-time lows, eurozone banks fell 3.8 percent after an EU financial stability watchdog said banks should not be allowed to pay dividends at least until the end of this year.
Oil majors Royal Dutch Shell, BP and Total fell between 3 percent and 4.5 percent as oil prices fell due to a stronger dollar and oversupply concerns.
The pound was driven by dollar moves on Tuesday, rising back above $1.27 but down half a percent against the euro, as shifts in global risk appetite played a bigger role for sterling than domestic issues such as Brexit.
The pound has risen 3.1 percent against the dollar this month, clearing $1.27 for the first time since March, as several countries emerge from coronavirus lockdowns, weakening demand for the safe-haven US currency.
When the dollar strengthened in early London trading, cable fell as much as 0.8 percent.
The dollar then weakened, causing sterling to recover its losses, back above $1.27.
3.13pm update: Emirates lays off thousands of pilots, cabin crew, plans more job cuts
Emirates, one of the world's biggest long-haul airlines, laid off hundreds of pilots and thousands of cabin crew on Tuesday as it manages a cash crunch caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
Five company sources said more job cuts are planned.
Aviation is one of the industries worst hit by the fallout from the virus outbreak, with airlines forced to lay off staff and seek government bailouts.
More redundancies were expected at Emirates this week including both Airbus A380 and Boeing 777 pilots, the sources said on the condition of anonymity.
The workforce of 4,300 pilots and nearly 22,000 cabin crew could shrink by almost a third from its pre-coronavirus levels, three of the sources said.
Without giving further details, an airline spokeswoman told Reuters some employees had been laid off.
She said: "Given the significant impact that the pandemic has had on our business, we simply cannot sustain excess resources and have to right size our workforce in line with our reduced operations."
A promise by the Dubai government to provide Emirates with new equity would allow it to "preserve its skilled workforce," the state airline said on May 10.
Emirates has laid off thousands of pilots and cabin staff (Image: GETTY)
The coronavirus crisis will lead the airline industry into record annual losses of $84 billion (£66b) as 2020 goes down as the "worst year in the history of aviation", the sector's main global body predicted on Tuesday.
Airline passenger traffic is expected to rise 55% in 2021 from its depressed level this year, while still remaining 29 percent below its 2019 level, the International Air Transport Association (IATA) said in an updated forecast.
The FTSE-100 index at 1:45pm was down 113.86 at 6358.73.
The FTSE-100 index at 12:45pm was down 104.33 at 6368.26.
Most G10 currencies fell on Tuesday as investors took profits from the risk-on mood seen in the markets in the past weeks.
The latest cause for exuberance, which drove stock markets higher, was last week's US jobs data for May - which was better than expected.
The Australian dollar was last down 1.2 percent to 0.6930 after falling nearly 2 percent to 0.6899 - a five-day low.
The New Zealand dollar fell 1 percent to 0.6494, off the four-and-a-half-month high touched earlier.
The euro fell 0.2 percent to $1.1277.
The FTSE-100 index at 11:45am was down 109.09 at 6363.50.
The FTSE-100 opened lower on Tuesday (Image: Getty)
