THE FTSE 100 index dropped sharply in opening trade on Friday, as markets reacted to US President Donald Trump's claims to "react strongly" if Beijing goes ahead with plans to clamp down on Hong Kong.
Fears of an international trade war heightened on Monday morning, as Donald Trump vowed to respond to Beijing's plans to clamp down on Hong Kong following an uprising there. Concerns about an increase in the rate of new coronavirus infections in Hong Kong have also worried markets. The US also made it harder for Chinese firms to list shares on the stock exchange, which is impacting global markets. The FTSE-100 fell 112 points to 5,903.05, extending its recent poor showing.
James Hughes of Scope Markets said: “Washington has continually blamed China for the Coronavirus pandemic, and last week blocked any chip supplies from the US to Chinese tech giant Huawei as well as passed legislation to make it harder for any Chinese firms to list shares on exchanges in the US."
Beijing also said it would not be setting a GDP growth target for the first time in 30 years, due to the unprecedented economic decline caused by the coronavirus pandemic.
In the UK, Asia-focused Prudential fell 5.8 percent amid worries over the health of the world’s second-largest economy.
The miners, led by Anglo American also plunged 5.2 percent in response to the news from China.
FOLLOW OUR LIVE UPDATES HERE:
FTSE 100 LIVE: The UK Government borrowed £62billion in April (Image: GETTY)
Global stock markets and oil prices have plummeted following the move from China to impose a new security law on Hong Kong, further straining relations with the US and adding more uncertainty to potential economic recovery.
Beijing announced it would impose new national security legislation on Hong Kong.
This saw Donald Trump warn the US would react "very strongly" against any attempt to gain more control over the former British colony.
World stock markets have started to tumble as a result, with MSCI's all-country index shedding nearly half a percent, while the pan-European STOXX 600 index lost 0.03 percent.
Wall Street also opened on the back foot, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average falling 0.17 percent.
Earlier in Asia, Hong Kong's Hang Seng index slid more than five percent to a seven-week low, its biggest daily percentage fall since 2015.
In the oil market, the price of US crude dropped 67 cents to $33.25 a barrel, while Brent plummeted by nearly a dollar in the day to settle at £35.13.
Telecoms giant Vodafone has announced Jean-Francois Van Boxmeer, current chief executive of Heineken, will become its new chairman later this year.
He will join the board this summer and replace outgoing chairman Gerard Kleisterlee in November, who will leave after nine years in the position.
Mr Van Boxmeer had been chief executive of Dutch-listed brewer Heineken since 2005.
The FTSE 100 has finished the trading week in the red after showing signs of encouragement earlier in the week.
London's stock index has falled 0.27 percent to 5,998.80 at the close of trading.
US stock indexes have dipped as increasing tensions between Washington and Beijing weighed heavily on markets struggling to predict the pace of economic recovery from the coronavirus crisis.
At 2.56pm, the Dow Jones Industrial Average had fallen 0.35 percent to 24,387.91, the S&P 500 decreased 0.15 percent to 2,944.17, but the Nasdaq Composite was up slightly by 0.09 percent at 9,293.39.
Andrea Cicione, head of strategy at TS Lombard in London said: "Sentiment is really vulnerable to expensive valuation at the moment.
"After the shock of the COVID-19 lockdown, we have to go through a regular recession with high unemployment, low capex, low demand and that's not what's priced in at the moment."
FTSE LIVE: The London stock index ended the week in the red (Image: GOOGLE)
Paul Withers taking over live reporting from Emily Ferguson.
Wetherspoons has issued some detailed guidance on how it plans to reopen its pubs.
Changes include protective screens at the till and in seating areas where it is not possible to separate the tables in accordance with social distancing measures.
The pub chain will also provide gloves, masks and protective eyewear for employees, though it will not be mandatory to wear them unless it is required by the Government.
Pubs will also have a one way system with a separate exit and entrance door where possible.
Customers will be asked to order via the app of pay using contactless cards wherever possible.
The FTSE-100 index at 1:45pm was down 21.99 at 5993.26.
The UK Government has announced it is extending the mortgage repayment holiday scheme by three months.
The scheme was announced in March to help home-owners struggling to make monthly mortgage payments due to the coronavirus pandemic.
Retail sales dropped a whopping 18.1 percent in April (Image: Getty)
