Welcome to the first iteration of the GAR CIArb Seat Index.
The Index provides one-page summaries of the favourableness of individual arbitral seats against a range of standard criteria. The aim is to capture, in concentrated form, the essence of a seat.
Right now the Index covers six seats. Over time it will grow, and at the right moment ratings – AAA, AA, A, BBB, BB etc - will be added, making it a unique resource.
But the essence of the Index is the highly condensed, one-page reports.
Here we describe how they are produced.
These GAR-CIArb Seat Index reports were developed from thousands of rows of comment submitted by Global Arbitration Review readers in late 2017.
Participants were encouraged to refer to key features of the arbitral law and practice and notable recent developments in a locale that made it favourable or unfavourable as a seat when judged against each of the London Principles. This was not a review of the popularity of the seats.
Note. The survey participants were asked to identify their home jurisdiction, but after that the responses were anonymous. Neither the assessment panel nor advisory board knew the identities of contributors to the survey.
The results for each seat were considered by a series of panels (three assessors per panel), with each panelist providing an individual assessment of the results. The panelists were instructed to draw on the information provided in the survey results, discounting purely subjective impressions and irrelevant observations, and supplementing the survey data with their direct experience and informatino from other sources anywhere the picture was incomplete. Panelists were encouraged to refrain from assessing any principle for which there was insufficient information.
The reports of the assessment panel were then reviewed by the advisory board comprising senior members of the arbitration community including, Yves Derains , Hilary Heilbron QC , Michael J Moser, Peter Rees QC , John Townsend , and Carita Wallgren-Lindholm . Based on their direct experience as arbitrators across several seats, the advisory board members were asked to confirmthat the information on which the assessment was based was complete and to suggest refinements to the results as appropriate, and to  ensure the reports comported with their own experience or that of their peers. Like the assessment panel, the advisory board members were each assigned a different combination of seats for assessment.
With the input of the advisory board incorporated, the reports were settled by the Co-chairs, Lord Peter Goldsmith QC and Professor Doug Jones AO , and approved by the advisory board, with copies also provided to the assessment panel.
During both the assessment panel stage and the subsequent advisory board review, every effort was made when assigning seats to avoid matches that could be questioned because of a close relationship between the reviewer and the seat. So, for example, Lord Goldsmith QC recused himself from consideration of the results in relation to Hong Kong given his current role with HKIAC.
