Investing.com — Strategists at Goldman Sachs believe that the high volatility and low profitability is likely to continue until the end of the year, but I see 31 the company, whose shares will allow their owners to receive the maximum income in a difficult market situation, writes Market Watch.
After falling 2.9 percent last week, analysts expect S&P 500 SPX will finish the year at the level of 3,000 points — 0.3% below the closing price on Friday. The consensus forecast assumes that over the next 12 months the growth potential of the typical stock will be 9% on high volatility during the remainder of the year, which will provide low returns with risk-adjusted in the coming months.
The research team for portfolio strategy of the investment Bank added 31 share in the basket with the highest Sharpe ratio, which is currently focused on health care providers, media, information technology, and aerospace and defense industries. The Sharpe ratio measures the return on investment adjusted for risk, and a higher ratio gives a more attractive income, after accounting for risk.
Goldman basket with the highest Sharpe ratio yielded the S&P 500 since the beginning of the year 591 basis points, although higher than the broad market index at 66% semi-annual periods since 1999 on average 271 basis point. Goldman notes that the basket has exceeded the index in may and early June, but has lagged since then, heightened concerns about the second wave of the virus.
After rebalancing, Goldman said that the basket will ensure a yield that will exceed the S&P 500.
Among the most promising securities was named as the shares of Western Digital, Merck (NYSE:MRK) & Co., Concho Resources, Philip Morris International (NYSE:PM) and Verizon (NYSE:VZ) Communications. These shares were among the new basket components with the highest ratio of expected return to assumed the six-month volatility. Among the “old” component with the highest ratio have General Motors (NYSE:GM), Comcast, Mondelez and Coca-Cola KO.
Natasha Kumar has been a reporter on the news desk since 2018. Before that she wrote about young adolescence and family dynamics for Styles and was the legal affairs correspondent for the Metro desk. Before joining The Times Hub, Natasha Kumar worked as a staff writer at the Village Voice and a freelancer for Newsday, The Wall Street Journal, GQ and Mirabella. To get in touch, contact me through my natasha@thetimeshub.in 1-800-268-7116
