The Hershey Company (NYSE: HSY) has once again been named to the prestigious Dow Jones Sustainability World and North America Indices (DJSI). Hershey received its best scores and largest improvements in key sustainability measures since joining the index in 2012.
HERSHEY, Pa., Sept.  25, 2019  (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- The Hershey Company (NYSE: HSY) has once again been named to the prestigious Dow Jones Sustainability World and North America Indices (DJSI). Hershey received its best scores and largest improvements in key sustainability measures since joining the index in 2012.  The company saw double-digit percentage improvements in key sustainability areas, including: Environmental, Raw Material Sourcing, Labor Practice Indicators, Human Rights, Human Capital Development and CSR & Philanthropy.  The largest increase, which was a 35 percent improvement in Human Rights, comes following the company’s launch of its global Human Rights policy earlier this year.
Hershey is one of only 8 companies from the Food, Beverage and Tobacco Industry in the World Index and one of six in the North America Index. This is the seventh consecutive year that Hershey has been included in the World Index and the eighth year for the North American Index. Hershey was evaluated among the 2,500 largest companies tracked in the S&P Global Broad Market Index, and Hershey’s DJSI ranking puts the company’s sustainability performance among the best in the world.
The DJSI Indices are regarded as one of the highest standards for evaluating corporate sustainability based on Environmental, Social, and Governance factors.
“Operating responsibly and sharing our goodness with the world is part of the DNA within Hershey and has set us apart for more than 125 years,” said Michele Buck, Chief Executive Officer at The Hershey Company. “I’m proud of how we have increased our focus and sustainability efforts that will continue to positively impact our business and the impact we can have on some of the world’s most pressing issues.”
Earlier this year, Hershey detailed its progress in the Shared Goodness 2018 Sustainability Report , outlining the company’s sustainability efforts including its Cocoa For Good strategy, a half-billion-dollar commitment by 2030 that aims to nourish children, elevate youth, build prosperous communities and preserve natural ecosystems. Also in 2018, Hershey exceeded 80 percent of the cocoa it sources globally as certified and sustainable, on track to achieve 100 percent by 2020.
The Hershey Company, celebrating its 125th anniversary in 2019, is headquartered in Hershey, Pa., and is an industry-leading snacks company known for bringing goodness to the world through its iconic brands, remarkable people and enduring commitment to help children succeed. Hershey has approximately 16,500 employees around the world who work every day to deliver delicious, quality products. The company has more than 80 brands that drive more than $7.8 billion in annual revenues, including such iconic brand names as Hershey’s, Reese’s, Kit Kat, Jolly Rancher, Ice Breakers, SkinnyPop and Pirate’s Booty.
For 125 years, Hershey has been committed to operating fairly, ethically and sustainably. Hershey founder, Milton Hershey, created Milton Hershey School in 1909 and since then the company has focused on helping children succeed.
