When you trade with IG, you can invest in Canadian shares directly if they have a dual-listing on a US stock exchange, or you can speculate on the prices of a wide variety of Canadian shares with CFDs and spread bets . Both offer exposure to the movements of Canadian share prices but they operate in different ways, and come with unique benefits and risks. Here’s a rundown of each.
When you invest in stocks, you’re buying them outright and adding them to your share dealing portfolio. You pay commission to open your position and put up the full cost of the shares upfront.
There are two ways to profit from investing:
A dividend is a portion of a company’s net profit that is returned to shareholders. If a stock you hold decides to pay $3 per share back to its investors, for example, you’ll get $3 for every share you own in the company. With IG, you’ll receive dividend payments directly into your account as soon as we receive them.
One major reason to invest in stocks is that you can keep your share dealing portfolio in an Individual Savings Account . By doing so, you’ll shield your income and profits from capital gains tax (CGT) . You can also keep your portfolio in a self-invested personal pension (SIPP) and pay no income tax or CGT on your investments. Stamp duty on international share dealing, meanwhile, is rare and charges are usually low.*
What Canadian shares can I invest in?
You can invest in any Canadian company that has a dual listing on a US exchange using your share dealing account. This gives you access to a wide range of blue-chip stocks – including nine of the ten largest Canadian companies by market cap – but it doesn’t include most stocks with a sole listing on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX).
When you trade stocks, you aren’t buying them outright. Instead, you’re speculating on their price movements – so you can profit from volatility without taking ownership of the underlying assets.
This brings two main benefits for traders. Firstly, you can go short as well as long. So if you think that a stock is due for a downturn, you can short it to make a profit from a fall in price. And second, you only have to pay a deposit called ‘margin’ to open your position. To trade $5000 in Royal Bank of Canada stock, for example, you might only have to pay $1000 upfront.
You will, however, pay overnight funding charges to cover the cost of maintaining your position over multiple days – you’ll pay these each night on rolling positions, or at the outset for share forwards. So if you’re planning on buying stocks and holding them over a long period, investing might be the better option.
You won’t own any shares when trading, so you can’t use an ISA or a SIPP. You don’t have to pay CGT on spread betting profits, however – and CFD losses can be offset against profits for tax purposes.*
What Canadian shares can I trade?
You can use CFDs or spread bets to trade any Canadian company that has a dual listing on a US exchange, plus hundreds of stocks listed solely on the TSX.
Open a live IG account to get started. Or if you’re not ready to commit any real capital, open a demo account to trade with £10,000 in virtual funds.
With IG, you can choose whether you want to start share dealing, CFD trading or spread betting – or a mix of all three – when you open an account. You can open an account on our website or via our app in minutes.
Once your account is live, you can choose from over 12,000 companies and funds to trade or invest in, including a range of Canadian stocks that are listed on US exchanges. And if you need any help at all learning to use our platform, you’ll have access to dedicated 24-hour support.
Already own US-listed shares? You can transfer them to your IG account quickly and easily.
The W8-BEN form is required by the American Inland Revenue Service (IRS) for any individual who wants to buy shares through US exchanges. That means UK investors who want to buy Canadian companies that are listed on US exchanges will need to fill out a W-8BEN first.
The W8-BEN notifies the IRS that you aren’t a US citizen, so we can apply an individual tax benefit on your behalf. This can reduce the tax you pay on dividends from your US and Canadian stocks by up to 30%. You can complete the form on our online platform, so you don’t need to download or post anything.
If you’re only planning to trade US-listed shares via spread bets, you won’t need a W8-BEN. But you’ll need to fill one out to open positions on US stocks via CFDs.
If you’re looking to invest in stocks, then you’ll pay commission to open your position. You can use your IG account to invest in Canadian shares listed on US exchanges at our standard commission rate of £10. If you place more than three IG trades in a particular month, then you won’t pay any commission to open your position.
How much does it cost to buy US-listed shares from the UK?
