manufacturing plant in the city, said last week that it was "studying carefully" the issue. Automotive factories, like other businesses, were already closed for the holidays.
"At the same time, the group and its Chinese partner are mobilized to implement measures to take care of the Chinese employees of their joint venture," it added.
The coronavirus outreak comes "at probably the worst time for China," said Jude Blanchette, head of China studies at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. The Lunar New Year "is the single biggest economic event in China where last year there was upwards of $150 billion spent during the period, so the economic implications could be significant," he told CNN last week.
The period marks the largest annual human migration on Earth , during which time hundreds of millions of Chinese travelers usually cram themselves into homebound trains, buses and planes for family reunions. The coronavirus outbreak has prompted millions to rethink those plans.
The overall number of trips made across China on Saturday, the first day of the Lunar New Year period, plunged nearly 30% from a year ago, Liu Xiaoming, vice minister for transport, told reporters on Sunday. Travel by plane and train fell more than 41%, he added.
Major hotel chains including IHG ( GXMLF ), Marriott ( MAR ) and Accor ( ACCYY ) said they will waive cancellation fees until February 8 for reservations at hotels in China and beyond.
Airline operators including Cathay ( CPCAY ) and Qantas ( QABSY ) said they will offer full refunds for passengers traveling to and froms China from January 24 until the end of February.
China's largest travel agency Trip.com ( TCOM ), also known as CTrip, said last week that it would offer customers free cancellations on all hotels, car rental services and tickets for tourist attractions in Wuhan until January 31. The stock dropped 18% last week in New York.
Trip.com's business "in the short-term, it will take a hit," Jane Sun told CNN in an interview on the sidelines of the Davos conference last week. But she anticipates that once the crisis is over, business will rebound thanks to pent-up demand.
The business woes come as the pace of China's economic growth is hitting historic lows and the country continues to suffer from the effects of the trade war with the United States.
The Wuhan coronavirus outbreak is already spurring people to hunker down and avoid going outside. That kind of behavior could deal a huge blow to the service sector, which now accounts for about 52% of the Chinese economy.
-- Paul LaMonica, Cristina Alesci, Clare Sebastian, Richard Quest and Alexandra Lin contributed to this report.
