Updating regularly to track how the pandemic is shaping our politics, economy, culture and daily life
Understanding the evolving public response to the coronavirus outbreak is vital in grasping the nature of this crisis and mapping where we go next. On a weekly basis, Morning Consult is conducting thousands of surveys to track the ways the outbreak is impacting our politics, economy, culture, and daily life. Every week, we’ll comb through the latest data and update this page with the key takeaways and trends you need to understand.
Americans Increasingly Think Other Countries Are Responding More Effectively to the Pandemic; Reported Local Health Risks Are Ticking Back Up
Throughout April, the share of U.S. adults who said their country’s response to the pandemic was “worse than most other countries” was about equal to the share who said it was better. In recent weeks, as case rates in the United States have climbed up, Americans have increasingly swung toward believing that their country’s response is worse than that of other countries. In the latest Morning Consult survey, 49 percent of U.S. adults said the response is worse, while just 32 percent say better, the largest gap since tracking began in early April. Read more
Reported local health risks are ticking back up: 32 percent of U.S. adults say the coronavirus poses a “severe” health risk in their local community, the highest level since late April. Democrats continue to be more likely than Republicans to say the risk is severe, but alarm among Republicans has notably risen in recent weeks. Read more
Most Europeans are wary of allowing in tourists amid health risks: As the European Union and United Kingdom announce plans to open their borders for tourism, new polling shows that much of the public is concerned about the potential health risks. In the countries polled, Italians were most receptive to allowing in tourists and the British were the least:
Here are the other key findings for this week:
⇾ Consumer confidence is ticking back down after initial recovery: Read more
⇾ Gen Z is growing pessimistic about the direction of the country amid the pandemic and protests: Read more
⇾ Most Americans are wearing masks. Those who don’t are far more likely to be socializing in public places. Read more
⇾ Gen Z already sees the coronavirus outbreak as the most impactful event of their lifetimes. Read more
⇾ 73 percent of U.S. adults say the Chinese government bears at least some responsibility for the current deaths, tied with “Americans who didn’t socially distance” as the most blamed entity. Read more
⇾ Voters continue to believe social distancing is worth the potential economic cost. Read more
The share of U.S. adults who are "very" concerned about the coronavirus outbreak, by generation
This data comes from Morning Consult's weekly coronavirus survey tracker, based on 2,200 surveys of U.S. adults. The latest survey was conducted June 25-29, 2020.
The share of U.S. adults who say the coronavirus is a severe health risk in their local community:
This data comes from Morning Consult's weekly coronavirus survey tracker, based on 2,200 surveys of U.S. adults. The latest survey was conducted June 18-21, 2020.
The share of U.S. adults who say that they are either “continuing to socialize in public places” or “continuing to socialize in public places, but less than before.”
In addition to those responses, respondents could also select the following: “I am not going to public places, but I am socializing with friends or family in my or their homes,” “I am not going to public places or interacting in-person, but I am socializing with friends or family virtually,“ and “I am not going to public places nor am I socializing with family or friends.”
This data comes from Morning Consult's weekly coronavirus survey tracker, based on 2,200 surveys of U.S. adults. The latest survey was conducted June 25-29, 2020.
Share of U.S. adults who are concerned about the coronavirus impact on the economy:
This data comes from Morning Consult's weekly coronavirus survey tracker, based on 2,200 surveys of U.S. adults. The latest survey was conducted June 18-21, 2020.
The Morning Consult Index of Consumer Sentiment by state as of May 15, 2020
Each day, Morning Consult surveys over 6,000 U.S. consumers on their views regarding current and future personal financial conditions and business conditions in the country as a whole. The results from those survey interviews are inputted into the Morning Consult Index of Consumer Sentiment (ICS), with higher numbers indicating higher consumer confidence. For context, the ICS at a national level was 86.3 as of May 15.
This data comes from Morning Consult Economic Intelligence, which surveys nearly 15,000 respondents globally on a daily basis on their personal finances and economic outlook
The share of U.S. adults who say they are more concerned about the economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak than the public health impact:
This data comes from the weekly Morning Consult/Politico survey, which is based on 1,987 surveys with registered voters, conducted June 12-14, 2020.
This chart shows the share of registered voters who agree “Americans should continue to social distance for as long as is needed to curb the spread of coronavirus even if it means continued damage to the economy.” Respondents could also choose the response “Americans should stop social distancing to stimulate the economy even if it means increasing the spread of coronavirus,” or that they don’t know or don’t have an opinion.
This data comes from the weekly Morning Consult/Politico survey, which is based on 1,987 surveys with registered voters, conducted June 12-14, 2020.
This data comes from Morning Consult's weekly coronavirus survey tracker, based on 2,200 surveys of U.S. adults. The latest survey was conducted June 18-21, 2020.
Net approval (approval minus disapproval) among registered voters of each of the following’s handling of the coronavirus:
This data comes from Morning Consult's weekly coronavirus survey tracker, based on 2,200 surveys of U.S. adults. The latest survey was conducted June 18-21, 2020.
The share of U.S. adults who say each of following describe the United States’ response to the COVID-19 pandemic “very” or “somewhat” well:
This data comes from Morning Consult's weekly coronavirus survey tracker, based on 2,200 surveys of U.S. adults. The latest survey was conducted June 25-29, 2020.
Who do you trust more to handle coronavirus?
This data comes from the weekly Morning Consult/Politico survey, which is based on 1,992 surveys with registered voters, conducted June 6-7, 2020.
The share of adults in each country who approve of their respective head of state:
This data comes from Morning Consult Political Intelligence and is based on an average of over 3,000 weekly interviews per non-U.S. leader, and over 49.000 weekly interviews for Trump. The latest data is based on surveys conducted June 10-16, 2020
The share of U.S. adults who said they are more likely to buy the following, based on fears over the coronavirus:
This data comes from Morning Consult's weekly coronavirus survey tracker, based on 2,200 surveys of U.S. adults. The latest survey was conducted April 24-26 is , 2020.
The data on this page primarily comes from four sources: a twice-weekly survey dedicated to tracking the coronavirus, the weekly Morning Consult/Politico poll tracking topical political events, Morning Consult Economic Intelligence , and Brand Intelligence .
Page design and updates by Nick Laughlin . Notice any issues? Email us .
