Hang Seng Futures suggest the Hong Kong index will open higher on Wednesday morning.
Aaran Fronda | Financial Writer, London | Publication date : 2020-03-18T07:11:58+0000
Prior to market open, Hang Seng Futures are trading 333 points higher, up 1.4%, as of 02:02 (HKT) on Wednesday.
The strength of pre-market trading suggests that the Hang Seng Index (HSI) will open a touch higher on Wednesday’s session.
The HSI closed 200 points higher on Tuesday to 23,263, up 0.86%.
Looking to trade the Hang Seng Index? Open a live or demo account with IG today.
Hong Kong’s stock market has finally found a degree of support on Tuesday, after sliding into a bear market last week, with the index down 20% since the beginning of January amid coronavirus concerns.
Outside of Hong Kong, shares in mainland China closed lower on Tuesday, with the Shanghai composite sliding 0.34% to 2779.
The Shenzhen composite also edged lower too, with the index down 0.43% to 1704.
Elsewhere in Asia, Japan’s Nikkei 225 closed marginally higher to 17,011, while South Korea’s Kospi closed 2.47% lower at 1672.
In a statement by the Philippine Stock Exchange, it said trading was suspended ‘to ensure the safety of employees and traders in light of the escalating cases of the coronavirus disease’.
The news will prompt investors to speculate whether stock exchanges in Europe and the US will opt to suspend trading if central banks’ emergency measures fail to quell the economic impact of the coronavirus.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Market volatility continues as coronavirus concerns amplify. Trade with IG and take advantage of:
Tight spreads – from just 1 point on major indices, and 2.8 on US crude
Guaranteed stops – they’re free to use, and only incur a fee when triggered
