This replaces an earlier item that incorrectly reported the date that the stock effectively is included in the Russell indexes. It has been corrected.
indexes. The index inclusion will be effective after the market opens on June 29. Trading volume swelled to 9.8 million shares, making iBio's stock the most actively traded ahead of the open. "Being included among the companies that comprise the Russell indexes is a significant milestone for iBio, which, we believe reflects the significant progress we have made towards building shareholder value over the past few months," said iBio Chief Executive Tom Isett. IBio's stock has soared more than 6-fold year to date (up 546.6%), while the Russell 2000 has lost 15.3% and the S&P 500 SPX,
has slipped 4.6%. IBio is working on developing COVID-19 vaccine platforms.
Inovio's stock surges to extend rally to 20-year high, while Stifel says price is now 'less palatable'
Shares of Inovio Pharmaceuticals Inc.  rallied 7.5% in premarket trading Friday, to extend their recent rocket ride to a 20-year high, even as biotechnology company was downgraded at Stifel Nicolaus on valuation concerns. The stock has run up 119% amid a four-day win streak to close Thursday at the highest price since September 2000, and has soared more than 9-fold (up 847%) year to date--the S&P 500  has lost 4.6% this year--as the company has a COVID-19 vaccine candidate in Phase 1 trials. Stifel analyst Stephan Willey raised his stock price target to $24 from $19, but cut his rating to hold after being at buy for at least the past 3 1/2 years, saying the risk-versus-reward investment scenario "seems less palatable" at current prices. " While acknowledging peer COVID-19 vaccine company valuations would suggest we're potentially leaving significant upside on the table should promising immunogenicity data (i.e. robust neutralizing antibody responses) and a large government-written check subsequently materialize, we also believe any potential downside risk in the absence of the aforementioned events occurring is equally-significant," Willey wrote in a note to clients.
