Thursday was a very volatile session and things were changing rapidly on the expiry day for June derivative contract. Nifty opened the session on a negative note and also, touched an intraday low of 10,194 and a high of 10,361 before closing below 10,300 level with a net loss of 16 points or 0.16 per cent.
The price action formed a small body bullish candle, bullish because the closing was higher than the opening. After the formation of a bearish engulfing candlestick pattern, there was a lack of follow-through sell-off. During the day, Nifty breached its prior session low but it did not close below the prior session low.
Going ahead, Thursday's high of 10,362 is an important resistance.  As long as this is protected, the bulls may not get a clear opportunity. The bulls would get strength only above the level of 10,362. On the flipside, a move below the level of 10,170 is expected to drag Nifty towards the next lower support of 9,930, which is rising wedge support line and also, 61.8 per cent retracement level of the recent upswing, which began on June 12.
RSI on the daily timeframe is above 60 mark but it trades below its nine-day period average while, on the hourly timeframe, it bounced exactly from 40-mark but made a double top around 50-mark. On the hourly timeframe, -DI is above +DI and ADX, which indicates bears has an upper hand. As long as bulls defend the level of 10,170 on the downside, we will not see any panic in the markets.
Camlin Fine Sciences: Camlin Fine Sciences Limited to raise up to Rs 1,800 million (USD 23.8 million) from funds advised by Convergent Finance LLP.
Galaxy Surfactants: In disclosure of the impact of COVID-19 pandemic, the company mentioned that it do not expect any substantial contraction in the demand for its products post COVID 19 as they are used in manufacturing of consumer cleaning products in home as well as personal care. However, it does expect demand for premium category speciality products, which is being impacted by down trading due to a decline in consumer’s income.
PNC Infratech: The company has received letters of award (LoA) from NHAI for HAM project worth Rs 1,412 crore.
Thomas Cook: The company has introduced Staycation, an array of mini-vacations for Indians increasingly seeking quick, stress-free getaways close to home. With stays at handpicked hotels, either within one’s city of residence or at a short-drivable distance, Staycation can come at an attractive priced, starting from Rs 2,199.00.
Next Article Markets may open strong, but be cautious for the day!
Please login or register to post comments.
