Vanguard Emerging Markets Shares Index Fund ( ASX: VGE ) could be the best way to invest in emerging markets.
Vanguard is a funds management business that is owned by its own investors. It was founded in 1975 and now has (or had) around AU$9.7 billion. It has 192 funds in the US, and 232 funds in markets outside the US. It’s a world leader in providing low-cost ETFs.
The idea is that emerging market countries are ones that are fully ‘developed’ yet like Australia, but have economies that are growing at a relatively attractive rate as they catch up to the economies of the developed world.
If you’re invested in companies which have the advantage of a growing economy then you’d hopefully see the earnings grow at a good pace too.
The countries that get the highest allocations are: China, Taiwan, India, Brazil, South Africa, Russia, Thailand, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, Mexico, Indonesia, Philippines and Qatar.
However, be aware that 42.2% of this fund is invested in Chin and another 15.4% is invested in Taiwan.
What are some of the shares that VGE is invested in?
Vanguard Emerging Markets Shares Index Fund is invested in over 5,000 businesses, which is a lot of diversification.
Looking at the underlying ETF, 24.3% of it is invested in financial shares, 19.5% is invested in technology, 15% is allocated to consumer services, 8.9% is allocated to industrials, 8.5% is allocated to consumer goods and so on.
In terms of actual shares owned, these are the biggest positions: Alibaba, Tencent, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing, China Construction Bank, Naspers, Meituan Dianping, Ping An Insurance, Reliance Industries, Industrial & Commercial Bank of China and JD.com.
Is Vanguard Emerging Markets Shares Index Fund worth buying?
It has a fairly high management fee compared to most other Vanguard ETFs of 0.48%. It’s probably the best way to get diversified exposure to emerging markets in Australia. However, there is a large exposure to countries you may not wish to be invested in like Russia or Brazil.
With all the Asian investments you may as well be invested in Vanguard FTSE Asia ex Japan Shares Index ETF ( ASX: VAE ).
How do you value an investment?
What does your process look like? Do you really understand what you’re investing in and why?
You should know, we’ve just asked our top analyst to put together a FREE valuation course and make them available to investors like you, for a limited time.
Complete with downloadable Excel models, templates and valuation tools, simply click here to access the course.
Disclaimer: Any information contained in this article is limited to general financial advice/information only. The information should not be relied upon because it has not taken into account your specific needs, goals or objectives. Please, consult a licenced and trusted financial adviser before acting on the information. Past performance is no guarantee of future performance. Nothing in this article should be considered a guarantee. Investing is risky and can result in capital loss. By reading this website, you acknowledge this warning and agree to our terms & conditions available here . This article is authorised by Owen Raszkiewicz of The Rask Group Pty Ltd.
