The Commodity Futures Trading Commission is expected to withdraw its certification of the KOSPI 200 Index Futures Contract traded on the Korean Exchange, and the Mini-KOSPI 200 Index Futures Contract traded on EUREX, as eligible for trading by US persons as an approved non-US stock index futures contract on April 1. As of that day, the underlying index to both contracts will be deemed narrow-based, and sale of futures contracts based on the index to US persons will be subject to both CFTC and Securities and Exchange Commission requirements. (Click here for general background on security futures and how futures contracts based on stock indices can morph from being a futures contract one day to a security futures contract the next in the August 8, 2013 SEC Report of Investigation Pursuant to Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934: Eurex Deutschland ).
As of February 28, 2020, KOSPI 200 index’s largest constituent, Samsung, increased to 33.16 percent of the index’s weighting. Under applicable law a narrow-based security index includes an index “in which a component security comprises more than 30 percent of the index’s weighting.” (Click here to access 7 U.S. Code § 1a(35).)
Cboe Transfer Trade Rules' Amendments Approved by SEC: The Securities and Exchange Commission approved an amendment to an existing Cboe rule authorizing off-exchange transfers of listed options under four additional circumstances. These are:
transfers to correct bona fide errors or to transfer positions in another account;
transfers between accounts with identical ownership subject to certain restrictions;
consolidations of accounts with identical ownership; and
transfers because of death, bankruptcy or other operations of law.
Additionally the SEC approved Cboe’s codification of prior guidance that off-floor transfers cannot net against other positions and no position may result in preferential haircut treatment or better margin treatment. Other codification of interpretations and rule amendments were also approved, including that approved transfers should be non-routine and non-recurring. (Click here to access Cboe Rules 6.7 and 6.8.)
ICE Clear Europe Proposes Rule Amendments to Accommodate Default Insurance: ICE Clear Europe proposed amendments to its rules to authorize it to obtain default insurance and to set forth how the proceeds of any successful claim would be applied under the clearinghouse’s default waterfall process. Currently, the clearinghouse is a named insured under a US $75 million default insurance policy. Comments regarding the Clearing House’s proposal will be accepted through April 7.
