All three major US indexes remain in bear-market territory as  coronavirus fears and the oil-price war weigh on investor  sentiments.
Global stock markets saw mostly gains following Thursday's  chaotic session. Germany's DAX rose 0.8%, while Britain's FTSE  100 climbed 2.5% and the Euro Stoxx 50 increased 1.6%.
Scroll down to read Markets Insider's coverage of  coronavirus-driven market madness:
A Joe Biden presidency would be better for markets than a second  Trump term, but only if Republicans keep the Senate, JPMorgan analysts said.
The bank laid out its best- and worst-case scenarios for the  "wildcard" 2020 elections in a Wednesday note. A Biden presidency  with a Republican Senate would best serve markets as the Trump  tax regime would likely continue, the analysts wrote. The 2017  Tax Cuts and Jobs Act boosted the historically long bull market,  lowering corporate taxes and triggering increased stock buybacks.
Coronavirus-related school closures could erase 1.5% from GDP this year, new report says
As the coronavirus pandemic unfolds, countries and cities around  the world are closing schools in an effort to contain the  outbreak. The decision to close schools could hurt the global  economy, however, according to one firm.
So far, as many as 29 countries including China,  Japan, and Iran have closed schools nationwide, according to a  Friday report by Capital Economics. In addition, 20 more countries have closed  schools at a local level , and it's likely that more will  shutter as the virus spreads, the report says.
"The most important economic impact of this will be the direct  reduction in output due to parents taking time off work to look  after their children," wrote Capital Economics.
"I have had a significant bearish market bet that is working out  for now," the money manager, who made a fortune betting against  mortgage securities after correctly predicting the 2008 housing  crisis, told Bloomberg .
Burry added that it was a "good size" wager against indexes, but  declined to offer more details.
The US's biggest bank expects the coronavirus pandemic to sink  the US and European economies into a deep recession as soon as  this summer.
JPMorgan's views of the virus  "have evolved dramatically in recent weeks" as the outbreak  spreads around the world and fuels the worst stock market  sell-offs in decades, the bank's economists wrote in a Thursday  note.
The US economy will shrink by 2% in the first quarter and 3% in  the second, JPMorgan projected, also suggesting the eurozone  economy will contract by 1.8% and 3.3% in the same periods.
Oil is on track for its worst week since the financial crisis amid coronavirus panic, global price war
Oil is barreling toward its  worst week since 2008 amid a global price war that has erupted as  the same time when the coronavirus outbreak is imperiling demand.
As OPEC and its allies continue to escalate a price war and  threaten to boost outputs, futures in New York have slumped as  much as 18% this week. By April, crude-oil supply could reach a  record high, according to Goldman Sachs.
The White House is looking into suspending student debt during the coronavirus outbreak, Mnuchin says
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said Friday that a temporary  suspension of student-loan debt was one of many policies the  White House might pursue as the coronavirus pandemic hits the US  economy.
Asked whether a three-month hiatus from student-loan payments was  under consideration, Mnuchin told CNBC: "That's on our list  of 50 different items we're bringing to the president for a  decision. That'll be something we're looking at."
President Donald Trump repeated calls for a payroll tax cut  Friday as the coronavirus outbreak increasingly raised alarm  about the US economy, even as it appeared there was little  support for such a policy on Capitol Hill.
"If you want to get money into the hands of people quickly &  efficiently, let them have the full money that they earned,  APPROVE A PAYROLL TAX CUT until the end of the year, December  31," the president wrote on  Twitter . "Then you are doing something that is really  meaningful. Only that will make a big difference!"
Bitcoin is losing its luster  as a safe-haven asset amid the coronavirus-induced market rout.
The world's largest cryptocurrency tumbled another 32% early  Friday, falling to $3,915. That brings its total losses in the  past two days to 50% - one of the largest drops on record for the  digital coin. Bitcoin pared losses after the epic drop.
Investors piled record amounts of capital into cash this week as  the bull market's 11-year run petered out.
Inflows to cash-like assets totaled a record $137 billion through  the five days ended March 11, Bloomberg reported Friday,  citing Bank of America and EPFR Global data. An all-time-high $14  billion was channeled into government bonds, while investors  dumped $3 billion into gold.
Warren Buffett announced in a letter to shareholders  on Friday that Berkshire Hathaway's annual meeting would be held  without shareholders this year amid growing concern over the  coronavirus pandemic.
"I very much regret this action; for many decades the annual  meeting has been a high point of the year for me and my partner,  Charlie Munger," Buffett, 89, wrote in the letter .
