We Are Motley. A Message of Solidarity From The Motley Fool.
The beleaguered retailer's market cap has fallen well below levels that qualify it as a large cap stock.
James Brumley is former stockbroker with a large Wall Street firm, and a former trading analyst for a small, options-based newsletter. After twenty years of professional experience in and around the market, his approach is one that combines fundamentals, sentiment, and common sense. It's also an approach that respects this John Keynes reality: The market isn't always rational.
The decision can't entirely be pinned on the adverse impact of the coronavirus. Macy's ( NYSE:M ) and its stock were both struggling before the pandemic took hold in the United States. But the COVID-19 contagion could be considered the proverbial last straw, doing enough damage to Macy's shares to force its removal as one of the S&P 500's constituents.
With its share price now down more than 90% from its 2015 peak -- and down more than 70% from this January's high -- Macy's current market cap now stands at just under $1.5 billion. That's well below the $10 billion threshold that generally divides large caps from mid caps. In fact, at under $2 billion, Standard & Poor's explained, "Macy's has a market capitalization more representative of the small-cap market space." To that end, Macy's will be joining the S&P 600 Small Cap Index as of April 6.
Being a component of a market index does not alter that company's performance or prospects. It can, however, impact institutional ownership of that stock. Mutual fund and exchange-traded fund companies that manage index-based portfolios may sell their existing Macy's holdings to make room for Carrier Global (NYSE: CARR) when it begins trading as a stand-alone company.
Carrier is being spun out from Raytheon Company ( NYSE:RTN ), which is expected to finalize its merger with United Technologies ( NYSE:RTX ) by the end of this week. That pairing will create another opening in the S&P 500 large cap index, however, which has already been earmarked for Otis Worldwide (NYSE:OTIS) once it too is spun out from the Raytheon/United Technologies union.
