Customers cling to their products and treatments while the industry puts a brave face on a bad situation.
It was business as usual at Sephora in the SoHo neighborhood of Manhattan Monday evening, give or take a few face masks not of the soothing mud variety.
Customers were browsing the latest Urban Decay palettes, sitting at mirrored stations getting makeup applied by sales associates and stocking up on luxury skin care, including $335 jars of Crème de la Mer.
Nina Sisco, 24, a fashion publicist, said she wasn’t overly worried about the spread of the new coronavirus . “I go on the subway every day, I’m still going out,” she said, as she dipped a disposable spool wand into a tube of Tom Ford Beauty mascara. (She tried it, but didn’t buy it.) “I’m still going to go on vacation, I’m still going to go to Miami.”
Another customer, Piaoxue Zhang, 23, who relocated to New York from China last year, was huddled with a friend by a tower of sanitizer, makeup remover and cotton rounds. Both wore protective masks but said they didn’t plan to stop shopping for makeup.
But as the crisis mounts, cosmetics companies, whose very business relies upon the now-discouraged practice of touching one’s face , are evaluating their regular practices.
Coty created a “global response team” that meets daily to “actively monitor the situation very closely.” Sephora has its employees wiping down front door handles with Clorox wipes hourly, though early this week consultants in at least one store were still applying makeup from common testers to customers. The company has canceled an annual convention , Sephoria, and said in a statement, in part: “At Sephora, the health and safety of our clients, employees and their families is our first priority. We are monitoring the global Covid-19 outbreak very closely, following the guidance recommended by our government, health officials and local leadership.”
Gucci Westman, a makeup artist and the founder of Westman Atelier, a makeup brand, canceled a Feb. 23 trip to Milan and Paris, where she planned to attend events, see clients and do the makeup for the fashion designer Rosie Assoulin’s presentation, which was called off.
“What’s going to happen is actresses and models will probably end up bringing their own makeup to shoots, or at least their own brushes,” Ms. Westman said, quickly adding: “I’m a freak about washing my brushes, but if you’re in contact with all these people, makeup artists who have done shows in Milan? You don’t really want to kiss those people who have been in Milan.”
Makeup is a daily pick-me-up for many even in difficult times, and there is an oft-cited economic indicator known as “ the Lipstick Effect ” ( more recently debunked ). This time around Chris Ventry, a vice president in the consumer and retail practice of management consultancy SSA & Company, optimistically predicted what he called “the Longwear Foundation (or Mascara) Effect.”
“As more and more people are wearing masks, they’re emphasizing other forms of makeup,” Mr. Ventry said, adding that fabric rubbing against the face stimulated the longwear foundation category in Asia. “People might get very creative with how they accessorize their eyes.”
An industry that relies on constant introduction of new shades and products will also have to get creative with how they are sold.
Tiffany Masterson, the founder of Drunk Elephant, one of Sephora’s best-selling skin care brands, was planning to introduce hair and body collections in April but will most likely cancel a three-day pop-up shop that was scheduled to open in Los Angeles on March 30. (California declared a state of emergency last week.) “That may not play well — that we’re hosting where multiple people come and hang out,” Ms. Masterson said. “It’s not smart.”
Credo Beauty, a retailer focusing on natural and organic makeup with nine stores across the United States, paused all in-store services through the end of March, said Dawn Dobras, the chief executive. Events planned for April will probably occur via livestream.
But a splashy Gucci Beauty installation blithely continued in Los Angeles last weekend. The brand, with Sephora, hosted events on March 6 and March 7 to celebrate its new mascara, the first new makeup release since the debut of a lipstick collection last year.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
“At this point it is too early to quantify the exact impact,” a spokesman for Coty, the beauty and fragrance licensee for Gucci and the parent company of Cover Girl, Rimmel and Sally Hansen, of the coronavirus, wrote in an email. “In terms of business impact, beyond the direct impact to China, we believe the coronavirus could negatively impact the broader travel retail sector.”
There may be a silver lining in all this for direct-to-consumer companies like Glossier, popular with millennials.
“There’s a real opportunity for leading online brands because a lot of consumers have always treated luxury beauty as something they want to see, touch, feel and sample in person before they invest in it,” said Clara Sieg, a general partner at Revolution Ventures, an investor in Playa, a hair care brand. “Being forced to make those decisions online gives you more comfort with it in the future.”
Jackie Flam, the chief marketing officer of Pierre Fabre, a beauty company in Paris that owns brands including Avene, Glytone and Klorane, said that last week’s sales for Klorane’s Dry Shampoo at Ulta Beauty were already higher online versus in store compared with the same period last year.
And sales for Avene’s hand cream in the United States have tripled in the past two to three weeks, according to the company, a result of increased hand washing and sanitizer usage.
“Hands are taking a beating,” Ms. Flam said.
And at the nail salon, they will encounter stepped-up precautions. Jin Soon Choi, a sought-after manicurist and the founder of four nail spas and a namesake nail polish brand, said that patrons were still coming in and that the biggest challenge had been trying to obtain a stock of masks for staff. Once optional for technicians, masks are now mandatory in her establishment, along with gloves.
Even as directives about public health increase in urgency, vanity can sometimes battle with common sense. Dr. Shereene Idriss, a dermatologist in New York, said that a patient who was put on home quarantine asked if she could still come in for a scheduled nonmedical procedure.
“We had to remind that patient that cosmetic treatments do not immunize you from potentially spreading the virus,” Dr. Idriss said. “At least she was responsible enough to call and let us know, and she didn’t sneak in.”
