hopes for a strong rebound in economic activity during the second half of 2020.
13.5% year-to-date, with disparate performances across regions and sectors.
economic support measures that were further reinforced during the month.
will depend on the shape of a recovery that’s still hard to gauge.
the social measures and medical emergency declarations elsewhere in Asia,
lockdown in April or May.
by slightly more encouraging news on the medical front. The good news included
a slowing in the number of new infections and deaths, particularly in those
European countries, such as Italy and Spain, hit hardest by the pandemic.
stabilisation of contagion – albeit at high levels – towards the end of April.
treatments and vaccines remains at a very early stage, some of the news flow
April was widespread across developed markets. Major indices rallied to their highest
outperformed: +12.7% for the S&P 500, +15.4% for the Nasdaq, boosted by the
growth of the Internet giants, whose stock-market valuations have fallen by
just 0.9% since the end of 2019.
EuroStoxx 50, 5.1%. At the global level, cyclical sectors tended to outperform
at the expense of defensive stocks and financials. Consumer cyclicals and
hope on the news front, equities haven’t suffered in recent weeks from the
fall in markets at the end of April.
business surveys – which had already tanked in March – continued to collapse,
fell heavily as unemployment began to rise sharply.
would still leave GDP below the pre-virus trend.
demand led to a plunge in oil prices, exacerbated by technical factors in te
West Texas Intermediate (WTI) futures market. The price of a barrel of crude
fell below zero on 20 April before edging back to finish the month at USD 18.8,
down by 8% from the end of March. Brent crude ended the month above USD
25/barrel, up by 11% for the month, while a cut in production of nearly 10
into effect on 1 May.
recent weeks have seen an unprecedented deterioration in economic indicators,
policies implemented in March and April, aimed at ensuring the normal
functioning of financial markets and supporting economic activity, have proved
effective, despite some difficulties, notably on the fiscal side.
assurances that they are determined to do more if necessary.
gradual recovery in economic activity in the coming months, news on the medical
likely to be one focus of investors' attention.
For risky assets, the main downside risk is that new, or longer, periods of lockdown would prolong the global recession. A more favourable scenario would be one whereby the world gains a faster, more complete control of the pandemic, which would enable a “good reflation” of economies.
Any views expressed here are those of the author as of the date of publication, are based on available information, and are subject to change without notice. Individual portfolio management teams may hold different views and may take different investment decisions for different clients.
The value of investments and the income they generate may go down as well as up and it is possible that investors will not recover their initial outlay. Past performance is no guarantee for future returns.
Investing in emerging markets, or specialised or restricted sectors is likely to be subject to a higher-than-average volatility due to a high degree of concentration, greater uncertainty because less information is available, there is less liquidity or due to greater sensitivity to changes in market conditions (social, political and economic conditions).
Some emerging markets offer less security than the majority of international developed markets. For this reason, services for portfolio transactions, liquidation and conservation on behalf of funds invested in emerging markets may carry greater risk.
