The PHLX Semiconductor Index was up 2.2% Tuesday afternoon.
The strong earnings that Micron Technology reported on Monday bode well for semiconductor stocks.
The PHLX Semiconductor Index (SOX) was up 2.2% Tuesday afternoon as shares of Micron (Ticker: MU) enjoyed a healthy gain of 4.1% to $51.15.
Of the nuggets investors can find buried in Micron’s financial statements, chip-watchers should take note of the company’s record solid-state drive sales and higher average price for flash-memory chips. Both could mean good things to come for Western Digital (WDC), which also makes storage chips, according to Benchmark analyst Mark Miller.
Miller rates Western Digital a Buy with a $60 target price. Of the analysts polled by FactSet, 20 rate the company a Buy and 12 have a Hold rating. Shares rose 4% to $43.66, which implies a 42% upside.
Like Micron, Western Digital makes solid-state drives, and analysts project it will sell $7.07 billion worth of them in fiscal 2020, which is lower than the $7.7 billion projected in May. Micron also reported that it had gained SSD market share, all of which is a good sign for Western Digital, Miller wrote.
Micron’s growing flash-memory sales and rising prices also bode well for Western Digital, Miller wrote. The highest-value flash memory accounted for 75% of shipments, which contributed to slightly improved margins.
Western Digital isn’t included in the PHLX Semiconductor index, which Barron’s used as a starting point for a look at the cheapest chip names . According to FactSet it trades at 14.3 times forward earnings, which would place it among the least-expensive names.
Other names on the screen include Intel (INTC), which rose 1.9% on Tuesday, Lam Research (LRCX), which gained 4.2%, and Qorvo (QRVO), which climbed 2%. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up about 0.1%.
Micron executives wouldn’t discuss memory pricing in its earnings call on Monday, but said it does account for that pricing in its forecast for the fiscal fourth quarter, which came in above investor expectations . Danely wrote that the fiscal fourth quarter is 14 weeks, which added roughly 7% to the company’s guidance.
Micron’s Earnings Shine on Chip Stocks. Here’s Why Western Digital Should Benefit.
The strong earnings that Micron Technologyreported on Monday bode well for semiconductor stocks.
