The image depicts radiation from an astronomical mystery known as a fast radio burst against a background of stars and galaxies. A number of instruments — especially those in the Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder — have detected hundreds of these bursts and are helping to solve the puzzle of their origin. By davidope (David Szakaly).
As chaos spiked in the Amazon, the physicist became a national hero by challenging Brazil’s government.
Ricardo Galvão nearly passed out when he heard the news and realized he was being targeted by his own president. On 19 July, Brazil’s leader, Jair Bolsonaro, lashed out against a report on deforestation by Galvão’s team at the National Institute for Space Research (INPE) in São Paulo. The group’s analysis had incited the president’s wrath because it found a sharp spike in forest clearing in the Amazon. The president accused the scientists of lying about the data and suggested that Galvão — as head of the institute — might be in cahoots with environmentalists. The 72-year-old fusion physicist was stunned by the accusation. “My wife had to bring me a glass of water,” he says.
Rather than rush to react, Galvão gave himself 12 hours to craft a response. After a nearly sleepless night, he spoke out in defence of INPE scientists. He also accused the president of cowardice and called for a face-to-face meeting — acts that he knew would lead to him losing his job. What he didn’t know was that he would become a hero of sorts, hailed by his scientific colleagues as well as by strangers on the streets. A woman even stopped him on the subway in São Paulo to thank him for standing up to Bolsonaro and helping her to understand why preserving the Amazon matters.
“He lost his job because he took a very clear and strong position in defence of science — and against authoritarianism,” says Paulo Artaxo, an atmospheric physicist and Galvão’s colleague at the University of São Paulo. Artaxo sees worrisome parallels between Bolsonaro’s government and the dictatorship that ruled Brazil between 1964 and 1985, including a tendency to attack any evidence that doesn’t support its political goals. “We need people like Galvão to stand up.”
It wasn’t Galvão’s first run-in with the Bolsonaro administration. Officials had repeatedly questioned the accuracy of INPE’s deforestation alerts, which use detailed analysis of satellite imagery.
This time, however, the president was attacking the integrity of scientists and one of Brazil’s top scientific institutions. As expected, Galvão was dismissed two weeks after he defended INPE, just as the burning season kicked off in the Amazon. Farmers light fires as the last step in clearing the land for agriculture.
Brazil’s reputation as an environmental leader has been deteriorating in recent years. The country had managed to curb deforestation by more than 80% between 2004 and 2012, but the aggressive environmental enforcement ended up sparking a political backlash and a rise in deforestation.
INPE’s latest numbers, released on 18 November, show that an estimated 9,762 kilometres of land — an area larger than Puerto Rico — was cleared between August 2018 and July 2019. That is an increase of 30% over the previous year, and more than twice the area cleared in 2012. Scientists and conservationists charge that Bolsonaro’s anti-environmental rhetoric has sent a signal to ranchers, farmers and land-grabbers that they can once again clear forest in the Amazon with impunity.
Galvão has since returned to his previous position at the University of São Paulo. He doesn’t enjoy the limelight and was preparing to stop giving interviews and focus on his fusion research. After receiving messages from fellow scientists thanking him for speaking out, however, he realized that he has a responsibility to continue to advocate on behalf of science — and scientists — in the face of political pressure. “I’m just a humble old man who works in physics,” Galvão says. “But I decided to go on for this reason.”
An astrophysicist chased mysterious fast radio bursts with an innovative radio telescope.
In the past quarter of a century, Victoria Kaspi has used many of the world’s top telescopes to make fundamental astronomy discoveries. But in 2017, she found herself helping to build one, screwing in hundreds of cables to connect the Canadian Hydrogen Intensity Mapping Experiment (CHIME) to powerful computers.
This year, the efforts of Kaspi and dozens of other astronomers paid off. CHIME became the world’s best hunter of fast radio bursts (FRBs) — mysterious flashes of radio energy that frequently pop off across the sky. CHIME, which is located in southern British Columbia, has spotted hundreds of bursts, many more than any other telescope. With it, astronomers hope to solve the puzzle of the signals’ origin.
Kaspi, an astrophysicist at McGill University in Montreal, Canada, had a major role in giving CHIME its powerful FRB-detection capabilities. The telescope was originally designed to map hydrogen emission from distant galaxies, to answer questions about the early Universe. But as the project was coming together in the early 2010s, so, too, was the burgeoning field of FRBs, the first of which was discovered in 2007. In 2013, astronomers reported four more examples, confirming that the flashes were a real phenomenon that needed explaining.
“That moment to me was a watershed,” says Kaspi. She had spent much of her career studying ultra-dense stellar remains known as neutron stars. But, suddenly, a new astrophysical mystery was emerging. Kaspi had been thinking about how CHIME could study fast-rotating neutron stars and realized the telescope’s sensitivity and large field-of-view could be ideal for bagging FRBs — but only if it were upgraded. She telephoned Ingrid Stairs, an astronomer at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, to chew over the idea. “And within a few months, she was leading this big proposal,” says Stairs.
Kaspi worked with the cosmologists who dreamt up the telescope to request more money from its main funder, the Canada Foundation for Innovation in Ottawa, to hunt for FRBs. They wanted to add another instrument and enough computing power to enable the telescope to churn through data gathered 1,000 times per second at 16,000 different frequencies. “We all knew this was very risky,” she says. “The telescope hadn’t been built yet, and here we were proposing to add something onto something that didn’t exist.”
But Kaspi, who became principal investigator of the FRB part of CHIME, pulled it off. Her scientific chops helped win the funding; her personal connections enabled her to build a large and diverse team; and her political skills were essential in bringing together the original cosmologists and the new FRB hunters, says Matthew Bailes, an astronomer at Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne, Australia.
Along the way, Kaspi has worked to develop the next generation of scientists, mindful of how challenging it can be to enter physics, especially for women. She won the nation’s highest science prize, the Gerhard Herzberg Canada Gold Medal for Science and Engineering, in 2016 and used the Can$1-million (US$760,000) prize to hire students and postdocs for CHIME.
This year, she helped to land a US$2.4-million grant from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation to explore building ‘outrigger’ telescopes. The outriggers would be sited some 1,000 kilometres away from CHIME and help in pinpointing FRBs. That would keep this inventive Canadian telescope at the forefront of astronomy.
“At this point, it’s like drinking from a fire hose, we have so much data,” Kaspi says. “Honestly, I’m blown away.”
A neuroscientist revived disembodied pig brains and challenged definitions of life and death.
Nenad Sestan was working in his office one afternoon in 2016, when he heard two of his lab members in a room across the hall giggling with excitement over a microscope. “I knew something was happening,” he says. “I realized it was something beyond our expectations.”
The researchers, at Yale School of Medicine in New Haven, Connecticut, had found electrical activity in brains taken from dead pigs. The team had painstakingly removed the organs shortly after death and infused them with oxygen and an ice-cold preservative, and in doing so, brought the brains at least partially back to life. With that shocking result, Sestan realized that what had started as a side project to find ways to better preserve brain tissue for research had morphed into a discovery that could redefine our understanding of life and death.
The excitement soon turned to concern, when the researchers thought they saw widespread, coordinated electrical activity — the type that can indicate consciousness. Sestan brought in a neurologist, who determined that the readout was actually an error, but the possibility had spooked them.
Sestan kept his cool and immediately did two things: he shut down the experiment and contacted the US National Institutes of Health (NIH), which funds his research, as well as a Yale bioethicist. Over the next few months, experts pored over the potential ethical implications, such as whether the brains could become conscious and whether physicians needed to reconsider the definition of brain death.
Sestan had anticipated the ethical questions and adopted some safeguards. Before starting the experiments, the group had decided to anaesthetize the brains with blocker drugs to prevent neurons from firing in unison — a prerequisite for consciousness.
Overall, the feat met with more excitement than concern. Sestan’s results suggested that oxygen deprivation, which can happen during a stroke or severe injury, was not as damaging to brain cells as previously thought. “It’s very important: something we overlooked, because nobody really thought that this was possible,” says Anna Devor, a biomedical engineer at Boston University in Massachusetts.
Once they were confident that the experiment was ethically sound, the researchers resumed their experiments. They submitted the work to Nature. But before the paper could be published, Sestan presented data at a public NIH neuroethics meeting and — despite his protests — the story appeared in the press.
Sestan admits he was amused by some of the sensationalist headlines, dubbing his project ‘Frankenswine’ and ‘Aporkalypse’. But he was stung by suggestions that the researchers were engineering immortality, or maintaining a room full of living brains in jars. Neither he nor his team wanted to discuss the results until the paper was out, but as their inboxes filled with concerns and rants from animal-rights activists and futurists, Sestan became depressed. “We were really very worried,” he says. He felt that all they could do, however, was to hold off on correcting public misunderstandings until the peer-review process had run its course.
Since the paper was published in April ( Z. Vrselja Nature 568, 336–343; 2019 ), the team has been so busy fielding enquiries from the media and scientists that it hasn’t performed any further experiments. Sestan wants to focus on his original questions and explore, for instance, how long the brains can be maintained for, and whether the technology can preserve other organs for transplantation.
From now on, this strand of his research will be decided by committee. “We want to get outside opinion before we do anything,” he says. “When you explore uncharted territory, you have to be very, very thoughtful.”
An ecologist and her colleagues assess Earth’s ecosystems and call for drastic action.
On 4 May, Sandra Díaz and 144 other researchers had a stark message for the world. They had just finished the most exhaustive study ever of the world’s biodiversity, and the news was worse than most researchers had imagined: one million species are heading for extinction because of human activities, and it will take drastic action to stop that. “The rate at which species are going extinct is at least tens to hundreds of times faster than it has been on average over the past ten million years,” Díaz says. “Our safety net is stretched almost to breaking point.”
Those alarming findings came from the Intergovernmental Science–Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES). Díaz, an ecologist at Argentina’s National University of Córdoba, is one of the panel’s three co-chairs. For most of the previous three years, she and her colleagues — anthropologist Eduardo Brondízio at Indiana University Bloomington and ecologist Josef Settele at the Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research in Halle, Germany — coordinated the work of experts from 51 countries, meeting in physical workshops and in virtual working groups, poring over 15,000 sources of information.
Their final report, which runs to 1,500 pages, says that nations will fail to meet most global targets in biodiversity and sustainable development unless they make massive changes, such as abandoning the idea that economies must grow constantly.
“We cannot live a fulfilling life, a life as we know it, without nature,” Díaz says. And if economies continue to run in such a destructive way, a “new economic model is needed for nature and people”, she says.
It’s a blunt and, in some ways, radical message. But Díaz does not shy away from speaking out on important issues in science and policy. She challenged, for instance, what was once one of the central tenets in twentieth-century ecology: the idea that ecosystems and their benefits to humans — such as food, or climate regulation — depend heavily on having large numbers of species. Shahid Naeem, a researcher at Columbia University in New York City who studies the impacts of biodiversity loss, says that Díaz has led the charge in highlighting the value of what plants actually do — known as their functional traits.
This insight and others came to Díaz through years spent trudging through the fields of Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin America, collecting leaves, measuring their toughness, and assessing soil properties. It’s a habit she developed growing up in central Argentina, when she would explore the Pampas grasslands while others took their afternoon rests. “I would escape the siesta to see plants and animals,” she says. “Ever since I was an undergraduate, I knew I wanted to be a researcher.”
Díaz has a second career now, beyond conservation science — influencing policy through her work with IPBES. She takes heart in how the panel’s report is being adopted by many social and environmental movements, including Extinction Rebellion, that are pushing for stronger and more urgent action on the environment.
“We have been amazed at its reach,” she says. “The report has come at the right moment.” And despite its dark prognosis, Díaz refuses to be pessimistic about humankind’s capacity to turn things around. “I have to be optimistic,” she says, “because there is no Plan B”.
The co-discoverer of Ebola faces his tenth battle with the virus in the DRC — his toughest yet.
In 1976, Jean-Jacques Muyembe Tamfum travelled deep into the tropical forests of what is now the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) to investigate an outbreak of an unidentified ailment that was swiftly killing people.
The young researcher realized that something was odd when he drew blood samples from those who were sick and the needle pricks wouldn’t clot. Blood spilt over his bare hands. Nurses he worked beside were dying, and Muyembe began to worry. “I started taking my temperature every morning and every night,” he says. Miraculously, he never fell ill from the virus, later named Ebola.
Now, 43 years after discovering the disease, Muyembe is leading the DRC’s response to the most volatile outbreak of Ebola yet. Since August 2018, the epidemic has killed more than 2,200 people in the northeast of the country, a region already pummelled by a quarter of a century of conflict and political instability.
Muyembe — who took the helm of the response in July — brings deep experience to the effort, along with a dedication to cutting-edge science. Beginning in 1995, he developed the key public-health measures still used to contain the virus. During a large outbreak in the DRC city of Kikwit, he realized that the most vital step was to converse with communities so that they trusted him and understood how to protect themselves. He found ways to bury the dead respectfully while minimizing the risk of infection. And he began investigations that would lead to the roll-out of effective Ebola drugs and vaccines. During this outbreak, he took blood from Ebola survivors and infused it into eight people who had been infected, in the hope that antibodies would quash the virus. Seven of the recipients survived.
Last month, a 680-person, controlled clinical trial led by his team showed a 90% survival rate for those treated with antibody-based drugs shortly after infection. One of the drugs, mAb114, is derived from an antibody from the blood of a survivor whom Muyembe recruited during the Kikwit outbreak. Nancy Sullivan, an immunologist at the US National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, attributes the success to Muyembe’s doggedness at the time. “His contribution was pivotal to show that you can do a trial in a chaotic outbreak,” she says.
In recent weeks, the number of new Ebola cases being recorded has dwindled — progress that Muyembe’s colleagues attribute in part to his leadership. Yet, in a rushed call with Nature in late November, the Ebola veteran was worried. Violence had broken out in Beni, a city hit hard by the epidemic, and Ebola responders were on lockdown. But backing down has never been an option for Muyembe. David Heymann, an epidemiologist at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, says: “He was there at the start and he is still there because he is so persistent.”
After this outbreak eventually ends, Muyembe is determined to unravel one last puzzle before retirement. His team has been collecting animals from regions where the virus has spilt into people, in the hope of tracking how the disease moves between species. “I want to find the vector,” he says.
A palaeontologist shook up the human family tree with the discovery of a remarkably preserved 3.8-million-year-old skull.
It was a pale, circular shape on the ground, about the width of a grapefruit, that caught the attention of Yohannes Haile-Selassie when he was investigating a site in the northern Ethiopian desert in February 2016. The object was jutting out of the parched earth just 3 metres away from a jawbone found by a goat herder a few hours earlier. “Before I picked it up, I said, ‘Oh my goodness, this is something.’”
The fossils together formed a remarkably complete early hominin skull, which Haile-Selassie’s team dated to 3.8 million years old. It belongs to a species called Australopithecus anamensis — the oldest and most elusive known human relative. That afternoon, the team celebrated their rare find with cold Cokes, beers and dancing.
The skull, known as ‘MRD’ and revealed to the world in August ( Y. Haile-Selassie et al. Nature 573, 214–219; 2019 ), gave researchers their first look at the face of this enigmatic ancient relative, which was previously known from just a few bone fragments. Palaeoanthropologists are impressed by the specimen, and some say it is rivalled only by Lucy, the 3.2-million-year-old skeleton fossil of the closely related species Australopithecus afarensis. “That’s a big thing to hear from our colleagues,” says Haile-Selassie, a palaeoanthropologist at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History in Ohio.
Haile-Selassie is considered one of the field’s most talented fossil finders. Many treasures have surfaced from his project in Woranso-Mille, a region scattered with hominin fossils from the Pliocene, a key period in the evolution of the genus Homo and its close relative Australopithecus between 5.3 million and 2.6 million years ago. He is also one of a crop of Ethiopian palaeoanthropologists who lead major scientific projects in their homeland — a big shift from a generation ago, when foreigners oversaw most of the research in this fossil-rich nation.
When Haile-Selassie was doing his PhD in the mid-1990s, his potential was clear and he had a knack for both laboratory and fieldwork, says Tim White, a palaeoanthropologist at the University of California, Berkeley, and Haile-Selassie’s PhD adviser. Fieldwork in remote areas is extremely difficult, says White, but Haile-Selassie has nailed it: organizing people, equipment, vehicles and permits, and all using multiple languages. “It’s not luck that Yohannes put these people in Ethiopia in this place, with all the right specialists to work on a problem.”
MRD is important in part because it is from a time period that was literally empty in terms of the fossil record, says Haile-Selassie. And it shook up the oldest branches of the hominin evolutionary tree. Researchers previously thought that Lucy’s species had evolved from A. anamensis — in a ‘classic’ case of direct evolution from one species to another, says Fred Spoor, a palaeontologist at the Natural History Museum in London. But Haile-Selassie and his colleagues argued that the skull’s features, together with the reanalysis of some existing fossils that it allowed, suggest that early hominin evolution was much messier, and that A. anamensis and A. afarensis overlapped for at least 100,000 years. It’s also vanishingly rare to find such an intact specimen. “The MRD find is an iconic cranium,” says White.
Not everyone agrees with the evolutionary shake-up that Haile-Selassie’s group has proposed. The team is still studying the cranium for more clues about its place in prehistory, and Haile-Selassie hopes to revisit the discovery site to enrich the picture. “Hopefully the rest of the skeleton might be there, who knows,” he says.
Of all his discoveries, MRD is number one, says Haile-Selassie. As a daily reminder, the moniker now features on his car’s number plate.
