Singapore--(Newsfile Corp. - June 30, 2020) - Raffles Financial Group Limited (CSE: RICH) (Frankfurt: 4VO) (OTC: RAFFF) ("Raffles" or "the Company") today announced that it has been included in the Top 10 ranking of the CSE Composite Index® and the CSE25™ Index, which are the two major indices under the Canadian Securities Exchange.
"We are honoured to be included with this prestigious group of companies on the Canadian Securities Exchange {CSE}, ranking #1 on the Diversified Industries section and one of Top 10 on the CSE25™ and CSE Composite Index®," said Chairman Dr. Charlie In. "This is a significant milestone for Raffles Financial, which has been providing public listing services to high-growth and profit-generating companies across Asia Pacific. We'd like to thank the CSE for the recognition as well as all our partners & collaborators who have contributed to the success of this company. Our addition to the CSE25™ would not be possible without the support of our shareholders, for whom we will continue to give our best in building a better Raffles in years to come."
CSE25™ is a subset of the CSE Composite Index. It contains the securities of the twenty-five largest index companies by market capitalization. This sub-index contains over 52.75% of the total weight of the Composite Index.
CSE Composite Index® is a broad indicator of market activity for the Canadian Securities Exchange (CSE). With approximately 75% coverage of all equities listed on the CSE, it is an uniquely positioned gauge of the Canadian small cap market. The index provides a distinctly different risk/return profile than the broad Canadian equity market.
About Raffles Financial Group Limited (CSE: RICH) (GR: 4VO) (OTC: RAFFF)
Raffles Financial Pte Ltd (a wholly-owned subsidiary of Raffles Financial Group Limited) is an exempt corporate finance advisory firm, registered with the Monetary Authority of Singapore, which provides public listing advisory and arrangement services. Raffles Financial serves as advisor for family trusts, family offices and investment funds. Please visit www.rafflesfinancial.co for more information.
Neither the Canadian Securities Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider (as that term is defined in the policies of the Canadian Securities Exchange) accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release. Certain statements contained in this release may constitute "forward-looking statements" or "forward-looking information" (collectively "forward-looking information") as those terms are used in Canadian securities laws. These statements relate to future events or future performance. The use of any of the words "could", "intend", "expect", "believe", "will", "projected", "estimated", "anticipates" and similar expressions and statements relating to matters that are not historical facts are intended to identify forward-looking information and are based on the Company's current belief or assumptions as to the outcome and timing of such future events. Actual future results may differ materially. In particular, this release contains forward-looking information relating to the business of the Company, the anticipated partnerships with financial institutions worldwide and the growth potential through Province Representatives. The forward-looking information contained in this release is made as of the date hereof and the Company is not obligated to update or revise any forward-looking information, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable securities laws. Because of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions contained herein, investors should not place undue reliance on forward-looking information. The foregoing statements expressly qualify any forward-looking information contained herein.
To view the source version of this press release, please visit https://www.newsfilecorp.com/release/58896
