Risk appetite rebounds strongly in June, index shows
Global investor confidence has risen to a nearly two-year high in June, an index that measures trades of institutional investors.The Global Investor Confidence Index increased to 94.3, jumping by 21 points from May’s revised reading of 73.3, State Street Global Markets reported today.North American Investor Confidence Index led the way, rising 1by 8.8 points to 86.2, followed closely by the ...
Global investor confidence has risen to a nearly two-year high in June, an index that measures trades of institutional investors.
The Global Investor Confidence Index increased to 94.3, jumping by 21 points from May’s revised reading of 73.3, State Street Global Markets reported today.
North American Investor Confidence Index led the way, rising 1by 8.8 points to 86.2, followed closely by the Asian ICI which was up by 18.6 points to 100.0. The European ICI was up double digits as well, rising to 119.7 from 108.5.
“Risk appetite saw a strong rebound in June. The Global Investor Confidence Index climbed to 94.3, its highest level in almost two years, buoyed by higher sentiment across all regions,” said Rajeev Bhargava, head of Investor Behavior Research, State Street Associates.
“Unprecedented action by central banks combined with the reopening of major economies around the globe likely drove a more optimistic tone of investors. However, it will be important to see whether the positive momentum in sentiment endures as signs of a second wave of coronavirus infections drive volatility in asset markets.”
The Investor Confidence Index was developed at State Street Associates, State Street Global Markets’s research and advisory services business, in partnership with FDO Partners. It measures investor confidence or risk appetite quantitatively by analyzing the actual buying and selling patterns of institutional investors.
The index assigns a precise meaning to changes in investor risk appetite: the greater the percentage allocation to equities, the higher risk appetite or confidence.
A reading of 100 is neutral; it is the level at which investors are neither increasing nor decreasing their long-term allocations to risky assets. The index differs from survey-based measures in that it is based on the actual trades, as opposed to opinions, of institutional investors.
