The S&P/ASX 200 ( INDEXASX: XJO ) is expected to jump this morning, according to data from the Sydney Futures Exchange. Here’s everything you need to know.
The ASX 200 followed a negative lead from Wall Street, falling 1.5%, albeit on lower volumes amid the beginning of school holidays.
The market traded as low as 2.2% throughout the day, with chronic underperformers in the property sector like Unibail-Rodamco-Westfield ( ASX: URW ) seeing significant tax-loss selling as 30 June nears. With a single day of trade remaining, the market is off 13% for the financial year, the worst since 2009.
Overnight, US and European stocks recovered on better than expected economic data, with the S&P500 erasing its June losses, finished up 1.5% and the Dow Jones Industrial Average up 2.3%.
The driving force was two-fold: record pending home sales, with contracts signed growing 44% in May, and the hope for additional stimulus from the Federal Reserve.
Boeing Co. (NSYE: BA) was the highlight, up 14%, after test flights of the 737 Max were approved. In Europe, it was the financial sectors pushing higher behind the likes of Germany’s Commerzbank (DE: CBKG), with the Eurostoxx 600 up 0.6% due to their strong relative performance against the US in reopening the economy.
Is FPH the next CSL?
Fisher & Paykel Healthcare Ltd ( ASX: FPH ) continues to stake a claim as the new CSL Ltd ( ASX: CSL ), rallying 6.8% on Monday after reporting a 37% improvement in profits. FPH manufacturers ventilators and benefitted from a 300% increase in sales to hospitals resulting in an 18% jump in revenue for the year ended 31 March. The result was a 15% increase in the dividend, sending the 2020 gains to 60%.
As Qantas Ltd ( ASX: QAN ) fell below its capital raising price, off 5%, Regional Express Holdings Ltd ( ASX: REX ) added 17% after confirming its intention to enter the Melbourne-Sydney-Brisbane route. As highlighted previously, there is simply too much uncertainty in the travel sector to warrant an investment , and I’m surprised the Qantas raising price started with a 3 not a 2.
Finally, Lotto operator Jumbo Interactive Ltd ( ASX: JIN ) fell 13.2% despite announcing a new 10-year deal with Tabcorp Holdings Ltd ( ASX: TAH ) in Queensland, with investors seemingly disappointed in stepped fee increases to 4.65% in 2023.
The renewable energy sector has become more interesting by the day, with UAC Energy and Iberdrola in a bidding war for Infigen Energy Ltd ( ASX: IFN ), the takeover offer now hitting $0.89 cents per share . The wind farm operator joins the now Federation and Minderoo owned Windlab ( ASX: WND ) in the hottest sector of the moment.
Whilst the transition to a lower-carbon economy has been heavily impacted during the COVID-19 crisis, trillions of dollars in stimulus, particularly across Europe and Asia, has been specifically targeted at the sector as Government’s embark on ‘Green New Deals’ and seek to exit the crisis stronger than before.
We enter the final day of trading for the financial year in a very different place to where it started, with central banks once again determining the outlook for investors. With some complacency creeping into markets, it’s my view that investors should be considered substantial changes to their investment strategy as we enter unchartered territory.
This report was written by Drew Meredith, Financial Adviser and Director of Wattle Partners. To get in contact with Drew, click here to visit the Wattle Partners website .
Amidst the COVID-19 confusion, some cloud-based companies are growing... FAST!
Meanwhile, industry researchers are valuing the entire cloud computing market at $US210 billion. If you ask me, it seems clear as day that this HUGE market is only going to get bigger in 2020 and beyond.
Our top investment analyst has just identified 3 growth stocks in a net cash position, with strong competitive forces... and obvious tailwinds at their back.
Claim your FREE investing report on our analyst's "3 best share ideas for the cloud revolution" when you create a free Rask Australia account.
Our report is 100% free and unlocks hundreds of hours of bonus content.
Simply click here to access the report.
Disclaimer and warning: This information is published by The Rask Group Pty Ltd and contains general financial advice and information. That means, the information/advice does not take into account your objectives, financial situation or needs. Because of that, you should consider if the advice is appropriate to you and your needs, before acting on the information. In addition, you should obtain and read the product disclosure statement (PDS) before making a decision to acquire a financial product. If you don’t know what your needs are, you should consult a trusted and licensed financial adviser who can provide you with personal financial product advice. Please read our Terms of Service and Financial Services Guide before using this website.
Drew is one of the founders of Wattle Partners. He is an experienced financial and investment adviser with expertise in self-managed superannuation funds, superannuation strategies, investment analysis and portfolio construction. Drew is a Partner at Wattle Partners .
