A global disease outbreak isn’t the kind of risk that many investors were trained to react to.
Friday’s version of uncertainty at the New York Stock Exchange: Just as the S&P 500 appeared headed for a 2 percent drop, late buying cut the losses.Credit...Jeenah Moon for The New York Times
There is nothing investors hate more than uncertainty. Right now, that is all there is.
Uncertainty about the severity and duration of the coronavirus outbreak , ripping around the world at something like light speed. Uncertainty about how the global economy will fare as factories, airports, stores, schools, entire cities shut down. Uncertainty about the ability of governments to contain the disease and the power of central banks to counter its economic fallout . Uncertainty about how long all this uncertainty will last.
The spiraling fears have caused financial carnage. The S&P 500 index has dropped 12 percent since Feb. 19, the sharpest dive in nine years. The plunge has obliterated roughly $3 trillion in wealth.
In the past two weeks, even decent days have been tinted with a scary aura. On Friday afternoon, the S&P was poised to lose more than 2 percent, before the index pared its losses amid a blizzard of buying in the moments before the closing bell. (A similar last-minute surge the previous Friday made an awful week a little less bad.) For all the heartburn-inducing turmoil , the S&P ended this week essentially flat.
Market records have been falling like dominoes. The Dow Jones industrial average, for example, had both its biggest single-day point decline (1,191 on Feb. 27) and its biggest gain (1,294 on Monday).
Behind the turbulence are confusion and anxiety, and a sense that the modern world is in an unprecedented situation. “There’s no playbook for this,” said Derek Devens, a portfolio manager at the fund company Neuberger Berman. “That’s been really hard for people to digest.”
The financial mayhem extends beyond the stock market.
Many companies are essentially frozen in place, unable to predict how the coronavirus might affect their businesses. Their immediate task is to figure out how to keep operating while making sure their employees are safe. In Silicon Valley, Apple and Twitter told people to work from home . In New York, Bank of America and JPMorgan Chase dispatched small parts of their trading desks to the suburbs so they would have backup crews to keep business running in an emergency.
With the global economy now poised to shrink, demand for oil is declining , causing the price of crude to crater. As investors flee from risk, gold prices have soared. The safest assets out there — bonds issued by the U.S. government — have shot higher in price. For the first time, the interest rates on 10-year Treasury note shriveled this week to less than 1 percent, falling on Friday to a record low of 0.71 percent.
A sudden global disease outbreak isn’t the kind of risk that many market players were trained to react to. Few investors are epidemiologists. The most sophisticated financial models and the fastest-moving trading algorithms are flying blind.
“This you can’t even put a model on, because it’s not really something that we’ve seen before,” said Michael Feroli, the chief U.S. economist at JPMorgan.
In financial circles, there’s a term for such events: a black swan. They are rare but ominous. And they are impossible to anticipate.
The Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks were a calamitous example, a so-called exogenous shock for markets, having originated outside the financial system itself. More often, market turmoil comes from within: the mortgage crisis and collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008; tremors in the junk bond market in 1987 and 1989; and the demise of the giant Long-Term Capital Management hedge fund in 1998.
In 2001, no one knew if the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon were merely the first in a series of strikes. With the spread of the coronavirus, no one knows how deadly and widespread it will prove to be, or how disruptive to people’s lives, or its impact on the domestic and global economy.
“Investors went from thinking everything was flawless to hopeless,” said Howard Marks, a co-chairman of the alternative asset manager Oaktree Capital Management. “People are thinking, ‘I’ll be stepping over bodies on Park Avenue, like the Black Plague.’ That’s panic.”
Fears can be self-fulfilling. On Thursday, the venture capital firm Sequoia Capital directed the young tech companies in which it has invested to “question every assumption about your business” and consider taking pre-emptive action to prepare for a downturn, such as curtailing spending and taking a hard look at the size of their workforces. Sequoia called the coronavirus “the black swan of 2020.”
In some respects, exogenous shocks sow even more fear and uncertainty than traditional financial crises, because investors have no experience to draw on. Monetary policy, and the central banks that wield it , can be effective at battling financial upheavals, as the Federal Reserve managed to do during the 2008 crisis, but it has no effect on viruses.
What is especially unnerving to investors now is the apparent impotence of institutions that would seem to have the greatest chances of soothing markets.
When the Fed announced an emergency decision on Tuesday to slash benchmark interest rates by half a percentage point, stock markets rallied for about 15 minutes before resuming their downward spiral.
One reason: Investors feared that the Fed — whose monetary policy has been a key to the stock market’s long rally — is running out of options to stimulate the economy. Eric Rosengren, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, said Friday that the central bank might need to weigh new measures to counter a downturn, including buying a wider array of assets.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
The reality is that nobody knows quite how to calm markets, much less how to contain the virus outbreak. Modest bits of upbeat news — the Labor Department announced on Friday morning that the American economy had added 273,000 jobs in February — haven’t done the trick.
“Today you had this great jobs report,” said Jay Foreman, the chief executive of the toy company Basic Fun. “It’s going to be exactly the opposite next month. I can’t imagine anybody is hiring anybody this month, unless they’re selling hand sanitizer.”
He said the coronavirus crisis was forcing him to lay off 18 of the company’s 175 workers — 10 in the United States, six in Hong Kong and two in Europe.
Nor were investors soothed by President Trump’s signing of a bill to provide $8.3 billion to fight the coronavirus or cheerful TV assurances from Larry Kudlow, the top White House economic adviser.
“There really isn’t a response from the administration or the authorities telling people to calm down and there’s a plan,” said Gennadiy Goldberg, a strategist at TD Securities in New York. “It certainly feels like there isn’t a plan, and I feel like that’s what the market’s reacting to.”
That is a recipe for more wild days in the weeks ahead. In certain Wall Street drugstores, antacid might be in as much demand as hand sanitizer.
“When there’s unprecedented uncertainty, which is what we’re dealing with, we could have elevated volatility for quite some time,” said Julian Emanuel, a strategist at the brokerage firm BTIG.
He noted that Mondays are often days of particular turbulence because investors have spent a couple of days stewing over events. “What you see in markets, very often these things turn on a weekend,” he said.
However intense, panics don’t last forever. When markets reopened after the Sept. 11 attacks, the Dow dropped more than 14 percent in a week. It turned out to be a buying opportunity; within a month, stocks had recouped their losses.
“There will come a day when we reach a bottom,” said Mr. Marks, the Oaktree co-chairman. “We have no idea when or where that bottom will be. But all great investments begin with discomfort. You make the big money buying things no one else will buy.”
Reporting was contributed by Ana Swanson, Jeanna Smialek, Emily Flitter, Mike Isaac and Karen Weise.
