'Investors need to be aware that it could be some time before they return to the blue-chip index given the outlook for travel remains very uncertain, with any return to pre-crisis levels likely to take years, not months,' he added.
'The reshuffle is one of the most far-reaching in the index's history and will impact many tracker funds. The crisis looks to have accelerated the shift to digital solutions for consumers.
'Whilst some of today's reshuffle may be reversed in due course, the disruption caused to businesses has really highlighted the need for companies to have both robust demand and strong business models.'
Shares are down nearly 60% since travellers were left stranded on quarantined ships for weeks. With cruises and bookings coming to a halt and the perception that cruises could be the area most hit within the travel sector, further equity capital raising hasn’t been enough to prevent its market capitalisation falling. Now ranked at a lowly 150th place.
Probably the one least affected by the current crisis, it has been in the relegation zone for some time now down to other factors, biggest of which is the tough trading environment in the UK. New cheaper utility providers have swept away its customer base and price caps from the regulator limit its profits. Its upstream business has felt the direct impact of lower oil and gas prices. Many felt a dividend cut was already on the cards even before the current crisis. Ranks at 143rd place.
The aerospace engineering group which only recently made a return to the top index is out again. Its business was already feeling the impact of the grounding of Boeing’s 737-Max planes following two accidents and now with airlines having grounded many more planes, fewer parts and components are needed. The medium term outlook also looks highly uncertain as the likes of Boeing and Airbus will build fewer planes. Ranks at 139th place.
Despite a recent recovery, the share price is still roughly half of what it was back in February. A strong liquidity position and its apparent ability to survive grounded flights for months isn’t enough for investors as it simply cannot win when people aren’t travelling. Like many others, dividend cuts and job losses have been announced to save on cash flows. However, easyJet is one of the better-run airlines and we’re confident it can make a better recovery than some of its peers when lockdowns and travel restrictions are lifted. Ranks at 121st place.
Gambling giant GVC Holdings would seem a surprise entrant to the FTSE 100 given the cancellation of sporting events worldwide and its share price plunging in March.
But analyst Nicholas Hyett of Hargreaves Lansdown writes that 'unlike some other operators GVC has multiple strings to its bow, and its online casino business has seen a modest rise in activity'.
'It's more evidence of something we've observed throughout this crisis – while some sectors have been hit hard, in general coronavirus and the associated lockdowns have turbo-charged trends that were already well underway,' he added.
Meanwhile, Centrica seems to be the odd one out among the relegated companies.
Emily Waterworth at Brewin Dolphin said that the energy sector had been hit hard by unprecedented lows in the oil and gas prices, price and the cancellation of services such as Smart Meter installations.
A recent rally in oil prices wasn’t enough to save Centrica’s place in the FTSE 100.
Meggitt, which supplies components and systems to the aerospace industry, has suffered following the mass suspension and cancellation of flights by airlines and the resulting grounding of aircraft.
EasyJet's shares were trading above 1,500p at the start of March but have since halved as a result of plunging passenger demand. In April, 99.6 per cent fewer people rode on an EasyJet plane compared to the same month last year.
Nine firms meanwhile are expected to gain entry to the FTSE 250 including Oxford Biomedica, which signed an agreement last week with AstraZeneca to make a Covid-19 vaccine candidate.
One significant faller from the FTSE 250, the events business Hyve Group, has seen its share price collapse by over 95 per cent since March as the coronavirus pandemic wreaked havoc on the exhibitions and conferences industry.
Brewer Marston's, travel company Stagecoach, and specialty chemicals firm Elementis are also likely to be relegated from the index.
