— Jeffrey Stein (@JStein_WaPo) June 29, 2020
And Stephen Moore, an outside adviser to the administration, is predicting a big, partisan fight over extending unemployment benefits:
— Jeffrey Stein (@JStein_WaPo) June 29, 2020
Former Obama Treasury economist Ernie Tedeschi suggests such a cut would be devastating for millions:
Letting the emergency UI payment expire entirely means cutting the income of 30 million people by 50-75% overnight. In the middle of a worsening pandemic. https://t.co/lEaEftK31A
— Ernie Tedeschi (@ernietedeschi) June 29, 2020
Amid the back and forth, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell will reemphasize a point he has made for weeks when he testifies before the House Financial Services Committee today: A robust recovery remains far from assured. He will cite recent economic momentum while highlighting looming challenges.
“Output and employment remain far below their pre-pandemic levels,” Powell will say, according to his prepared remarks . “The path forward for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on our success in containing the virus. A full recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it is safe to reengage in a broad range of activities.”
Welcome to The Finance 202, our must-read tipsheet on where Wall Street meets Washington.
The "Fearless Girl" statue stands in front of the New York Stock Exchange on Monday. (Angela Weiss / AFP)
A surge in Boeing shares helped lead the way. “Wall Street stocks closed higher on Monday and the S&P 500 was poised to clinch its biggest quarterly percentage gain since 1998 as investors hoped for a stimulus-backed economic rebound," Reuters's Chuck Mikolajczak reports . Boeing shares “jumped more than 14% after a 737 MAX took off on Monday from a Seattle-area airport on the first day of certification flight testing with U.S. Federal Aviation Administration and company test pilots, a crucial moment in Boeing’s worst-ever crisis.”
“A spike in virus infections in Southern and Western states last week sent the S&P 500 down nearly 3%, but the threat of a deeper-than-feared recession has led investors to expect more stimulus measures from the Federal Reserve or Congress… The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 580.25 points, or 2.32%, to 25,595.8, the S&P 500 gained 44.19 points, or 1.47%, to 3,053.24 and the Nasdaq Composite added 116.93 points, or 1.2%, to 9,874.15.”
Futures are down. “U.S. stock futures drifted down Tuesday as investors gauged the risks posed by fresh lockdowns to the economic recovery and rebalanced portfolios on the final day of the second quarter while locking in gains,” WSJ's Anna Isaac reports . “Futures tied to the S&P 500 ticked 0.2% lower. That still leaves the gauge for U.S. stocks on track to end the quarter having erased most of its losses from the first three months of the year.”
Investors are stumped about where the market is headed in coming months. “When it comes to the future of the stock market, investors’ predictions are all over the map,” Bloomberg's Amena Saad and Sarah Ponczek write . “When asked where the S&P 500 Index would end the year, a fifth of respondents to a survey conducted by DataTrek Research said the benchmark will close out 2020 up more than 10% from current levels. That’s roughly the same number who predicted the index will finish down more than 10%. ‘Every option from “really bad” (down 10% from here) to “really good” ( 10%) got basically the same number of votes,’ Nicholas Colas, DataTrek’s co-founder, wrote in an email."
Fed eyes buying corporate debt of massive companies, including U.S subsidiaries of foreign firms.
The central bank's novel corporate debt-buying plan is stirring debate. One question is "whether its efforts are going to the neediest slices of the economy,” Rachel Siegel reports .“The Fed on Sunday disclosed its index of nearly 800 companies, including Verizon, Comcast and U.S. divisions of Toyota, Volkswagen, Daimler and BMW. The index essentially represents a snapshot used to guide the Fed’s corporate debt purchases — and widens the scope of questions the Fed could face as it tries to prevent a broader economic collapse.
"The central bank has said it launched the corporate debt program to support the markets and, in turn, companies in need of cash that are also vying to keep workers on the payrolls. But as with much of the Fed’s recession response, the central bank has never bought corporate debt like this before, and it’s unclear what the implications of its actions will be.”
At least 2,575,000 cases have been reported; at least 124,000 have died .
Weekly jobless claims can be inflated: “Eight states and Puerto Rico have reported Pandemic Unemployment Assistance claims higher than those for regular state programs, according to figures released Thursday. On the surface, this suggests there are many more self-employed and gig workers losing their jobs. In reality, states contacted by Bloomberg News explained that the totals reflect backlogged claims from prior weeks finally making their way through the system. In addition, with each retroactive week counted as a separate claim, one person can account for multiple claims in the tally,” Bloomberg's Katia Dmitrieva, Maeve Sheehey, and Reade Pickert report .
House Democrats pass Obamacare expansion: “The House passed the first significant expansion of the Affordable Care Act since its birth a decade ago, providing Democrats a high-wattage platform to castigate [Trump] for his efforts to overturn the landmark law during a pandemic and an election year,” Amy Goldstein reports .
Nearly 150 University of Georgia workers test positive: “Georgia is witnessing a steep rise in new coronavirus cases, with the fastest growth occurring among people between the ages of 18 to 29, according to the AJC. People under 30 make up the largest share of the state’s cases, and, since April, the median age of those testing positive has fallen from the mid-50s to the mid-30s,” Antonia Farzan reports .
Gilead prices COVID-19 drug remdesivir at $2,340 per patient in developed nations: “Soon after the announcement, the Trump administration said it had secured nearly all of the company’s supply of the drug for use in U.S. hospitals through September, with a contract for 500,000 treatment courses, which it will make available to hospitals at Gilead’s price. Other developed countries will pay 25 percent less than the United States, a discount Gilead said reflects a need to make the drug as widely available as possible throughout the world,” Hannah Denham, Yasmeen Abutaleb and Christopher Rowland report .
AMC pushes back reopening to July 30: “Previously, the company had planned on starting to reopen theaters in mid-July in time for the releases of ‘Tenet' and ‘Mulan,' However, late last week both Warner Bros. and Disney pushed their releases into August …,” CNBC's Sarah Whitten reports .
Cirque du Soleil files for bankruptcy protection: “The Montreal-based entertainment company, which runs six shows in Las Vegas, has struggled to keep its business running amid coronavirus restrictions that started in March, forcing it to lay off about 95 percent of its workforce and temporarily suspend its shows,” Reuters's Nivedita Balu, Praveen Paramasivam and Jessica DiNapoli report .
New Zealand cancels plans to hold Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit: “The gathering of world leaders from nearly two dozen nations, including the United States, wasn’t slated to take place until November 2021. But New Zealand’s foreign affairs minister, Winston Peters, said that the event’s logistics require ‘a large volume of high-level visitors’ entering the country as soon as late 2020 for planning and security purposes,” Antonia Farzan reports .
Lockdowns return for some Australians: “The Australian state of Victoria has reimposed lockdown measures in 10 suburbs of Melbourne that appear to be at the center of a new outbreak,” Antonia Farzan reports .
The exodus from Trump's economic team continues.
A top Treasury official is expected to quit this week: “Bimal Patel, a top deputy to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, is departing the administration … Patel, who will leave at the end of this week, has played a key role in overseeing the administration’s $500 billion small-business rescue program and helps lead Treasury’s efforts related to the banking system,” Jeff Stein reports .
“He is the third senior economic adviser in the past week to signal plans to leave the Trump administration, and others have left their roles in the past month. Patel was sworn in to the Treasury post in June 2019.”
Talking on the White House lawn, Larry Kudlow tells reporters the White House is well-served by its remaining economists, including "Tyler Goodbody." (His name is Tyler Goodspeed)
— Jeffrey Stein (@JStein_WaPo) June 29, 2020
A man rides a segway past Spanish Civil Guards at the headquarters of Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) during a raid in Madrid in 2016. (Juan Medina/File/Reuters)
China may soon let its largest banks square off against Wall Street titans.
Amid trade tensions big U.S. banks have continued to ramp up their own investments: “China is getting ready to allow its largest commercial banks to enter into investment banking and bond and stock deal-making as soon as this year, paving the way for them to take on Wall Street rivals as competition heats up in the nation’s $21 trillion capital market,” Bloomberg reports .
“Regulators are discussing plans to grant such licenses initially to some of the nation’s biggest lenders, including Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd. and China Construction Bank Corp., on a pilot basis … The potential entry of Chinese banks, which have $43 trillion in assets, into deal making and trading would increase competition for global firms including Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Morgan Stanley, which have been expanding their operations in China and can this year petition for full control of local securities firms."
Interest in the new technology is growing because some U.S. officials and lawmakers see it as a way to challenge Huawei, the Chinese company that has dominated wireless equipment sales for years.
SCOTUS makes it easier for a president to fire CFPB head.
But the court did not strike down the agency entirely: “In a divided decision, the court said the agency’s structure violates the Constitution’s separation-of-powers design,” Ann E. Marimow and Renae Merle report .
“Its single-director configuration concentrates ‘significant governmental power in the hands of a single individual accountable to no one,’ wrote Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr., who was joined in part by the court’s other conservative justices. ‘. . . With no colleagues to persuade, and no boss or electorate looking over her shoulder, the Director may dictate and enforce policy for a vital segment of the economy affecting millions of Americans.’”
Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.), who pushed for the agency as a Harvard professor, hailed the fact her brainchild is here to stay: But she slammed justices for undermining the director's power.
Even after today’s ruling, the @CFPB is still an independent agency. The director of that agency still works for the American people. Not Donald Trump. Not Congress. Not the banking industry. Nothing in the Supreme Court ruling changes that.
— Elizabeth Warren (@SenWarren) June 29, 2020
Former vice president Joe Biden. (Matt Slocum/AP)
Biden tells donors he'll axe most of Trump's tax cuts.
He conceded his wealthy patrons may not like that: “Biden’s warning to his backers came as the candidate laid out an ambitious suite of policy goals during a virtual campaign fundraiser on Monday. The event raised at least $2 million,” CNBC's Kevin Breuninger reports .
“'I’m going to get rid of the bulk of Trump’s $2 trillion tax cut,' Biden said, ‘and a lot of you may not like that but I’m going to close loopholes like capital gains and stepped up basis.’ [He] also said he would raise the corporate tax rate to 28 percent, which he said would raise an estimated $1.3 trillion over the next decade. The Trump tax cuts had shrunk corporate taxes to 21 percent from 35 percent."
Chesapeake Energy Corporation's 50 acre campus is seen in Oklahoma City in 2012. (Chesapeake Energy Corp. picture)
Collapse in energy prices wasn't the only thing that sunk Chesapeake.
The fracking giant made a number of questionable spending decisions: “CEO Robert D. ‘Doug’ Lawler found in examining the company’s books a $110 million bill for two parking garages … That was part of about $30 billion in spending above cash flow that happened from 2010-12, while the late Aubrey McClendon was CEO and prior to Lawler taking over in 2013,” CNBC's Jeff Cox reports .
“Other revelations include a wine collection in a cave hidden behind a broom closet in the Chesapeake office. Extravagances further included a season ticket package to the NBA’s Oklahoma City Thunder that was the biggest in the league and a lavish campus that was modeled after Duke University, complete with bee keepers, botox treatments and chaplains for employees.”
Lululemon to acquire at-home fitness company Mirror for $500 million: “Lululemon shares were up almost 4% in after-hours trading,” CNBC's Lauren Thomas reports .
“Mirror is seen as a competitor to other at-home workout equipment makers including Peloton. Many former gym users have flocked to these devices during the pandemic, with fitness studios forced shut to try to curb the spread of covid-19.”
