The Stock Buyback Binge May Be Over. For Now.
Companies are hitting the pause button on share buybacks, which have suddenly become politically and financially unpalatable.
The coronavirus pandemic has brought a sudden halt to one of corporate America’s favorite pursuits: the share buyback.
Two years ago, a tax overhaul package left big businesses flush with cash and touched off a record binge of companies scooping up their own shares, which helped push stock prices higher.
That’s all over for now.
The spreading outbreak has sent stocks down about 30 percent in the past month, triggered millions of layoffs and prompted the Federal Reserve to pump trillions of dollars into the economy to prevent collapse. And companies are navigating a rapidly shifting landscape — one in which spending cash to buy back their own shares is both politically and economically untenable.
Over the weekend, as Congress worked to fashion a $1.8 trillion stimulus package for the economy, President Trump lent his support to provisions in the bill meant to block companies that receive federal money from using it to buy back shares.
“I don’t want to give a bailout to a company and then have somebody go out and use that money to buy back stock in the company and raise the price and then get a bonus. OK?” President Trump said at a news conference on Sunday. “So I may be Republican, but I don’t like that.” It was a switch for the administration, which supported buybacks as an efficient way to inject excess corporate capital into the economy after the tax overhaul took effect.
Democratic leaders, including Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont , have also called for or supported bans on buybacks by companies that receive assistance.
“Buyback activity will slow dramatically, both for political and practical reasons,” Goldman Sachs stock market analysts wrote in a research note published on Monday. “First, politicians are denouncing repurchases given the impending recession. Second, from a practical perspective, as revenues evaporate firms will be looking to preserve cash.”
AT&T, Nordstrom and McDonald’s are among the companies that have recently suspended buyback programs, as have big banks such as JPMorgan Chase and Citigroup. Boeing, which suspended its buyback program last year after problems with its 737 Max aircraft, extended the pause in repurchases.
But buybacks were a fraught topic well before the coronavirus outbreak.
When companies have excess cash on their hands, they typically return some of that money to shareholders — either in the form of a dividend payment or through a share buyback. By repurchasing stock, a company reduces the number of shares in the open market. The reduced supply of shares tends to push prices up.
Investors have long been enamored with buybacks for that reason — even the announcement of such a program would often send a company’s stock price shooting higher — and companies have preferred them to paying out dividends. But critics of buybacks say they’re a poor use of company cash that could instead be invested in long-term growth and workers.
Companies in the S&P 500 stock index spent more than $2 trillion buying back their own stocks over the last three years, which helped solidify the status of corporations as the single largest source of demand for American stocks . But the recent slump has mostly wiped out the gains; more than $8 trillion in shareholder value has vanished over the past month.
Republicans who had pushed for the tax cuts said they would increase economic growth, prod companies to invest and raise wages for workers. But the results were mixed: Wages did rise, but growth in the gross domestic product didn’t accelerate meaningfully. And investment slumped, in part because of last year’s trade war with China. Democrats pointed to the boom as proof that the law was a giveaway to corporations and the wealthy — over 80 percent of household stock ownership is controlled by the wealthiest 10 percent of American households.
Now, with both the president souring on the practice and critics in Congress turning up the heat on buybacks as they hammer out the details of a stimulus bill, investors have grown leery, too.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
In recent weeks, they’ve jettisoned stocks of companies that are the among the largest buyers of their own shares. From the market’s peak on Feb. 19 through the close of trading on Monday, the S&P 500 buyback index — which measures the performance of the top 100 companies with the highest buyback activity — fell 42.5 percent. That performance was worse than the regular S&P 500 index, which was down roughly 34 percent.
“It’s significantly underperformed,” said Ben Laidler, chief executive of Tower Hudson Research, a financial markets research firm in London. “The market is certainly worried about this for some of those stocks.”
Buybacks might shrink for the foreseeable future because companies would rather save their cash and don’t want to be singled out for criticism by politicians, analysts said. Already this year, announcements of new plans for buybacks are down more than 35 percent — in dollar terms — according to data from Birinyi Associates, a financial markets research group.
Perhaps no other industry illustrates the awkward position that corporate America finds itself in more than airlines. Major airlines spent $19 billion repurchasing their own shares over the last three years. Now, with the coronavirus virtually paralyzing the global travel industry, these companies are in deep financial trouble and looking to the federal government to bail them out. The Treasury has asked Congress to approve around $50 billion in emergency loans to shore up the airline industry. Delta and United have suspended their buybacks, and airline executives have committed to halting buybacks for the life of the federal loans they might receive.
Banks, too, have received rising levels of support from the Federal Reserve, which has intervened repeatedly in the market to ensure borrowing costs remain low in key short-term financial markets. Such assistance makes it politically impossible to spend billions of dollars repurchasing shares, Mr. Laidler said.
“You can’t essentially be seen to be taking assistance at the same time you’re buying back shares and returning money to shareholders,” he said.
A trade group representing large banks such as JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and Citigroup announced this month that its members were suspending buybacks , saying their goal was using their available capital to “provide maximum support to individuals, small businesses and the broader economy through lending and other important services.”
Other major companies are cutting their buybacks because of more pressing needs. Boeing, which extended the halt of its buyback program and cut its dividend last week, has sought $60 billion in government support for the aerospace manufacturing industry.
