Stop making bad jokes about the panic purchase of toilet paper. It's become the new index of community concern.
The Toilet Paper index seems to have replaced the Volatility Index as the starkest indication of the level of fear unleashed by the coronavirus.
Certainly this new TIX seems just as reliable a barometer of the public mood as the more commonly cited VIX on the stockmarket.
Shoppers in an eastern suburbs Woolworths, where shelves are being cleared of toilet paper.
It’s not just the empty shelves evident in Australian supermarkets despite Woolworths now imposing a limit on customer purchases of toilet rolls and corporate commitments to plentiful supply coming.
The sudden eruption of a toilet paper crisis here turns out to be another bizarre emanation of globalisation. Politicians around the world are urging toilet calm upon their citizens but with little apparent effect. The shortage created by panic buying and hoarding is creating its own self re-enforcing fear index.
And rather than reassuring people, ready access to instant information from around the globe as well as the local neighbourhood only intensifies the sense of alarm. So what seemed an oddity of Hong Kong shoppers panic-buying a few weeks ago has now become a worldwide phenomenon, even in the home of the extraordinary Japanese toilet with its unique washing features. FOMO, it seems, applies to the most basic of human needs.
“What is it with toilet paper? It is not as if coronavirus causes diarrhoea,” I overhear one woman complaining to a friend on the phone as she bemoans her family's failure to locate any.
True. But such logic quickly fades to invisible under the miasma of free floating anxiety around the world. And that is what is shrouding societies and economies everywhere despite the insistence of politicians, regulators and central bankers that this is not the time for panic.
What was a health crisis with Chinese characteristics has become an economic crisis with no borders. And that means a general crisis of trust as well.
The diminishing glue of community faith in the leadership of authorities, institutions  and business has been increasingly evident, especially in many Western countries, over the past several years. “Fake news” going viral on social media is actually only part of the spread of “infopanic” now.
Despite the absence of hard economic data so far, the lack of confidence about what comes next – as much as the breakdown of supply chains – is becoming more obvious every day. So the 0.5 per cent emergency interest rate cut by the US Fed, for example, quickly served to create more fear in markets that the “experts” must realise the economic implications are even worse.
Almost empty Woolworths supermarket shelves in Sydney.
Central bankers should hardly take all the blame for being largely out of ammunition after so many years of record low rates. Every time there was a suggestion rates needed to go back up a little, central bankers were excoriated by politicians while sharemarkets reacted with alarm.
Donald Trump is still insisting, for example, that Jerome Powell should have cut by far more this week given the US economy is “the best in the world” yet other countries have lower rates.
But the market scepticism will inevitably extend to the ability of broke governments, including the Trump Administration, to be more effective than monetary policy in arresting the convulsive shocks to the global economic system.
James McCormack, global head of sovereign ratings at Fitch, pointed out the catch in the recent statement from the G7 about using “all appropriate policy tools" to safeguard against risks from the coronavirus.
“There is precious little fiscal space across the G7,” he said.
As the Morrison government likes to insist, it does have a little more space than most due to its past budget discipline. How much of a difference the promise of “targeted and responsible” measures can and will make to businesses and consumers is much less clear.
The economy was still relatively weak in the last quarter of the year, another reason for Philip Lowe’s frustrated calls for greater fiscal stimulus well before the coronavirus imploded all differences of opinion with Canberra.
The new government stimulus measure s will now be unveiled sooner rather than later with any notion of a budget surplus vanishing over the distant horizon. Will even new billions of dollars to come be adequate to avert a major downturn? Even the strongest companies are likely to need plenty of cash and strong balance sheets as buffers. What about others that don’t have the same level of protection?
While the government’s argument that the economic impact of coronavirus will eventually pass may be valid, it can’t bridge the deepening chasm of doubt about what could happen between now and then. No Australian government “plan” can hold back a global tide of economic pessimism. At best, it will limit damage.
In any previous week, for example, the Morrison government would have been heartened by the December quarter GDP figures of 0.5 per cent showing a modest but better than expected improvement in annual growth to 2.2 per per cent.
Josh Frydenberg berates Labor on its economic record.
In parliament, Josh Frydenberg was still happy to talk up Australia’s strong economic record and jobs growth relative to other countries. He still knows all the attention is now focused on just how bad the March and June quarters will be.
“We’ve been moving to fully understand the economic impact of this significant event,” the Prime Minister said, as he emphasised the difference between this and previous financial shocks.
But it is not that his boast of getting ahead and staying ahead of the health crisis will sound increasingly hollow as the number of cases in Australia increases despite the government’s best containment efforts. It’s also that the reality of a global pandemic represents a massive threat to all countries’ economic health. And to human psychology.
It’s why TIX and VIX are both in play.
Jennifer Hewett is the National Affairs columnist. She writes a daily column on politics, business and the economy. Connect with Jennifer on Twitter . Email Jennifer at jennifer.hewett@afr.com
