This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Apple is among the companies whose debt is likely to be included in the Fed’s index, according to BMO.
The Federal Reserve released news this week that markets found encouraging: It is creating an index of bonds that meet its standards, and will use it as a blueprint for a portion of its debt purchases.
The new index won’t expand the potential size or reach of central-bank stimulus. But it will ease some of the burden on U.S. companies that may want the Fed to buy their bonds . A look at how it is supposed to work, and what it is meant to achieve, offers clues about what companies are likely to benefit.
The most obvious benefit is that it reduces companies’ paperwork requirements. Outside of the index-based purchases, companies that want the Fed to buy their bonds need to certify they are eligible for the central bank’s secondary-market purchases. But companies with bonds in the index don’t need to proactively make those certifications.
“Having a large percentage of hundreds of American corporations certify compliance was very difficult from an operational standpoint to begin with,” wrote strategists at BMO Capital Markets in a recent note. “Without certification, the Fed was potentially left with a huge liquidity facility that wasn’t allowed to buy anything but [ exchange-traded funds ],” which it has been buying for weeks.
Beyond that, the index solves a couple of problems with the optics of the facility. First, it precludes the argument that the Fed is picking winners and losers in the market. It also reduces the risk that companies’ reputations could be damaged if they received help from central bankers.
“Higher-rated issuers were likely to carefully weigh the benefits of certifying against the potential political costs of being perceived as requesting support from the Fed,” Citigroup ’s credit strategists wrote in a recent note. “By removing this certification requirement, the Fed will now apparently determine for itself each issuers’ eligibility.”
To be included in the Fed’s index, a bond must mature in five years or less. And the company that issued it must be based in the U.S., rated investment grade (as of March 22), and not have taken any other coronavirus aid from the government. The index also won’t include bonds issued by banks. And importantly, the Fed will only buy 10% of the amount of debt each issuer has outstanding.
Once all those rules are applied, the Fed’s index will likely include about $455 billion of U.S. corporate bonds, according to the BMO strategists. That means the entire index would be smaller than the $750 billion limit the Fed has imposed on its corporate-bond purchases,
Compared to investors who own investment-grade bond indexes today, the Fed will be buying a relatively larger share of bonds issued by consumer companies and real-estate investment trusts.
The Fed’s index will also have smaller positions in bonds of industrial and energy companies than the broader market, BMO says. Industrial bonds tend to have longer maturities and foreign issuers, and 40% of energy bonds are issued by foreign companies.
BMO says that the Fed could end up buying issuers’ newer bonds, because many older bonds don’t trade often.
“We suspect that within the sectors discussed above, the SMCCF will favor certain issues over others, and that liquidity will be the most important quality that dictates Fed corporate bond buying,” BMO’s strategists wrote in a recent note, referring to the bank’s Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility.
“This should generally favor the largest issuers and recently issued debt. This could provide additional rationale to think that new issues will continue to be extremely well-subscribed at narrow spreads.”
There is a chance the Fed could take a different approach, however. Because its stimulus effort is meant to help smooth the market’s functioning, the Fed could decide to buy older bonds because they are less liquid.
The 15 companies with the most debt in the index, BMO estimates, are likely to be the following, ranked according to the amount included: AT&T (T); Apple (AAPL); Comcast (CMCSA); Verizon Communications (VZ); Microsoft (MSFT); Anheuser-Busch InBev (BUD); AbbVie (ABBV); CVS Health (CVS); Oracle (ORCL); General Electric (GE); General Motors (GM); Duke Energy (DUK); Ford Motor (F); International Business Machines (IBM); and Walmart (WMT).
The Fed can spend up to $750 billion buying corporate bonds and bond ETFs, depending on the investments it chooses to buy. It isn’t yet clear how much of those purchases will be guided by the index.
The Federal Reserve released news this week that markets found encouraging: It is creating an index of bonds that meet its standards, and will use it as a blueprint for a portion of its debt purchases.
