For decades, some investors have been concerned about the mutual funds in their portfolio.
Not about the ups and downs of the investments, but about how environmental, diversity and other social issues are handled by the companies held within the mutual funds.
There is only one fund, an exchange-traded fund (ETF), that specifically focuses on investing in companies with strong racial and ethnic diversity policies, according to financial research firm Morningstar.
Impact Shares NAACP Minority Empowerment ETF (NACP) “is designed to provide exposure to U.S. companies with strong racial and ethnic diversity policies in place, empowering employees irrespective of their race or nationality,” the fund’s website says, noting the fund focuses on “companies that fit the NAACP’s vision of good corporate citizens.”
The large company index fund tracks an index created by Morningstar called the Morningstar Minority Empowerment Index.
Any profits earned by Impact Shares, which is a nonprofit, are donated to the NAACP.
“The NACP ETF is the first of its kind in that investors can allocate money to the companies that have a track record of supporting the NAACP’s vision for corporate America and our constituents,” Marvin Owens of the NAACP said when the fund was launched.
The president and founder of the fund, Ethan Powell, said it “recognized that there was a need in the marketplace for companies to be more effectively engaged on how they might improve their business practices and culture relative to issues impacting people of color.”
“There were similar funds in the market addressing issues impacting women but none focused on people of color,” Powell said. “When evaluating social advocacy organizations, it became clear that the NAACP and their corporate engagement team were well positioned to assist corporate America to improve their corporate citizenship in this area.”
For example, Powell said, the NAACP worked with Starbucks — one of the companies in the index — to respond to the 2018 incident where two Black men were arrested at a Philadelphia Starbucks. The men, who said they were waiting for a friend, were later released and they received apologies from the company, which instituted a new training program for employees.
In a blog post, Morningstar’s head of sustainability research Jon Hale said investors should not ignore the broader social impact their investments can make.
When a fund has a large stake in a company, it can “form the basis of engagements between shareholders and companies that can result in changes in corporate policy and behavior. Proxy voting and shareholder resolutions provide additional paths for shareholder influence,” Hale said.
“Many of these funds have performed well over the past five years , including so far during this year’s recession ,” Hale said.
While Hale said NACP is the only fund that focuses exclusively on empowering minorities, there are nearly 200 broadly diversified sustainable investment stock funds that “typically include the consideration of corporate diversity programs, discrimination policies, board diversity, freedom of association policies, and other relevant areas like supplier standards and worker health and safety.”
Hale said most of these fund companies are expected to engage with companies about how they are addressing systemic racism.
“Calvert Research and Management, for example, says it will ask companies to provide information on the racial diversity of their employees, disclose pay equity across race and gender, and publicly take a stand on what they are doing to combat racism in the criminal justice and education systems,” Hale said.
Our journalism needs your support. Please subscribe today to NJ.com .
Note to readers: if you purchase something through one of our affiliate links we may earn a commission.
© 2020 Advance Local Media LLC. All rights reserved ( About Us ).
The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Advance Local.
Community Rules apply to all content you upload or otherwise submit to this site.
