The key, though, for achieving some degree of personal comfort, is to find an asset allocation that is appropriate for you. How do you accomplish that?
Back in those relatively peaceful days just a few months ago, he suggested imagining a stock market decline of more than 50 percent, one like the terrible bear market of October 2007 through February 2009.
In such a decline, he asked, what kind of losses could you live with? As it turned out, that wasn’t a theoretical question. This week, he said ruefully, “For a lot of people, that kind of pain’s already here.”
The market dropped more than 33 percent before action by the Federal Reserve turned stocks around on March 23. I intend to keep buying equities steadily — but with the coronavirus raging , unemployment mounting and the global economy shrinking rapidly, it would not shock me if further declines were to bring the stock market more than 50 percent from its February peak.
For someone near retirement or already there, a classic allocation might be 25 percent stock and 75 percent bonds, he said. The hefty bond component of such a portfolio is intended to provide a buffer, providing some income while protecting him from losses in the stock market.
At the age of 73, that’s the recipe he personally favors. “I want to be able to relax, to forget about the market, and sleep at night,” he said. “For me, this kind of portfolio lets me do that.”
How has Mr. Booth’s conservative portfolio been working this year? He told me he hasn’t checked. “It will be OK,” he said. “That’s the point — setting up something you don’t need to look at, so you can do other things.”
I checked for him and found that with some important qualifications, it has fared about as well as expected. Dimensional’s Global Allocation fund has that 25/75 stock/bond asset allocation, for example. It has lost money this year, but not nearly as much as the S&P 500.
In the first quarter, the fund declined about 6 percent, including dividends, compared with a loss, with dividends, of about 20 percent in the S&P 500, according to FactSet. The Vanguard Target Retirement Income fund, another conservative fund with a fairly similar asset allocation — 30 percent stock and 70 percent bonds — also lost about 6 percent.
That doesn’t strike me as much to worry about, not for a long-term investment.
But for retirees living on such a portfolio, it may be a different matter, because those figures understate the intensity of the downturn at its worst, from Feb. 19 to March 23.
What are the symptoms of coronavirus?
Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days.
What’s the best material for a mask?
Scientists around the country have tried to identify everyday materials that do a good job of filtering microscopic particles. In recent tests, HEPA furnace filters scored high, as did vacuum cleaner bags, fabric similar to flannel pajamas and those of 600-count pillowcases. Other materials tested included layered coffee filters and scarves and bandannas. These scored lower, but still captured a small percentage of particles.
Is it harder to exercise while wearing a mask?
A commentary published this month on the website of the British Journal of Sports Medicine points out that covering your face during exercise “comes with issues of potential breathing restriction and discomfort” and requires “balancing benefits versus possible adverse events.” Masks do alter exercise , says Cedric X. Bryant, the president and chief science officer of the American Council on Exercise, a nonprofit organization that funds exercise research and certifies fitness professionals. “In my personal experience,” he says, “heart rates are higher at the same relative intensity when you wear a mask.” Some people also could experience lightheadedness during familiar workouts while masked, says Len Kravitz, a professor of exercise science at the University of New Mexico.
I’ve heard about a treatment called dexamethasone. Does it work?
The steroid, dexamethasone, is the first treatment shown to reduce mortality in severely ill patients, according to scientists in Britain. The drug appears to reduce inflammation caused by the immune system, protecting the tissues. In the study, dexamethasone reduced deaths of patients on ventilators by one-third, and deaths of patients on oxygen by one-fifth.
What is pandemic paid leave?
The coronavirus emergency relief package gives many American workers paid leave if they need to take time off because of the virus. It gives qualified workers two weeks of paid sick leave if they are ill, quarantined or seeking diagnosis or preventive care for coronavirus, or if they are caring for sick family members. It gives 12 weeks of paid leave to people caring for children whose schools are closed or whose child care provider is unavailable because of the coronavirus. It is the first time the United States has had widespread federally mandated paid leave, and includes people who don’t typically get such benefits, like part-time and gig economy workers. But the measure excludes at least half of private-sector workers, including those at the country’s largest employers, and gives small employers significant leeway to deny leave.
Does asymptomatic transmission of Covid-19 happen?
So far, the evidence seems to show it does. A widely cited paper published in April suggests that people are most infectious about two days before the onset of coronavirus symptoms and estimated that 44 percent of new infections were a result of transmission from people who were not yet showing symptoms. Recently, a top expert at the World Health Organization stated that transmission of the coronavirus by people who did not have symptoms was “very rare,” but she later walked back that statement.
What’s the risk of catching coronavirus from a surface?
Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals . But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks.
How does blood type influence coronavirus?
A study by European scientists is the first to document a strong statistical link between genetic variations and Covid-19 , the illness caused by the coronavirus. Having Type A blood was linked to a 50 percent increase in the likelihood that a patient would need to get oxygen or to go on a ventilator, according to the new study.
How many people have lost their jobs due to coronavirus in the U.S.?
The unemployment rate fell to 13.3 percent in May, the Labor Department said on June 5, an unexpected improvement in the nation’s job market as hiring rebounded faster than economists expected. Economists had forecast the unemployment rate to increase to as much as 20 percent, after it hit 14.7 percent in April, which was the highest since the government began keeping official statistics after World War II. But the unemployment rate dipped instead, with employers adding 2.5 million jobs, after more than 20 million jobs were lost in April.
How can I protect myself while flying?
If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.)
What should I do if I feel sick?
If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others.
Consider that the DFA fund lost 10.5 percent in that short period, according to FactSet, and that the Vanguard fund lost 12.5 percent. That’s much better than the S&P 500’s 34 percent loss in the same stretch but, still, if you find losses like that too excruciating, you could readjust now by selling stock and holding even more bonds.
Note, however, that even many bonds and bond funds faltered in that period. The S&P Aggregate Bond index, which measures the broad bond market, did not rise, as bonds often do in stock-market downturns. It fell in that brief stretch, albeit by less than 1 percent. Only Treasury bonds held their own, and, even here, there were problems.
Large exchange-traded bond funds run by BlackRock, State Street and Vanguard all traded at prices lower than those being offered by their underlying bonds. This unusual market distortion would have cost you money if you had tried to sell one of these E.T.F.s at the depth of the market’s troubles, though the situation straightened out after the Fed intervened heavily in the markets.
The lesson from this brief bond glitch is, I think, that you do not want to put yourself in a position in which you must make urgent short-term sales. “Raise cash when things are calm,” Mr. Booth said.
Shift enough money into cash — and hold it in a bank or a conservatively run money market fund — so that you can ride out a market storm without having to make sales under duress.
Younger investors, of course, most likely have far more than 25 percent of their portfolios allocated to stocks. The Vanguard target-date fund for people planning to retire in 2065, for example, is allocated nearly 90 percent to equities.
More common stock-bond splits are 70-30 and 60-40. I checked the performance of those kinds of portfolios during the worst of this downturn, from Feb. 19 to March 23. They were, in a word, ugly.
Here are the numbers for a few representative, broadly diversified funds, according to FactSet:
Dimensional DFA Global Allocation 60/40 Portfolio (60 percent stocks, 40 percent bonds and cash): negative 24 percent.
Vanguard Balanced (60 percent stocks, 40 percent bonds and cash): negative 23 percent.
Vanguard LifeStrategy Growth (79 percent stock, 21 percent bonds and cash): negative 29 percent.
I think it’s likely that more aggressive strategies will pay off if you can afford to wait. But as Robert Shiller, the Yale economist, pointed out in The New York Times recently, you might have to wait a long while. We just can’t predict the short-term market.
This isn’t an ideal time to sell stock, because prices have already dropped considerably. But they may well fall further. If you already know, from recent experience, that you couldn’t handle that, Mr. Booth said, by all means, sell, and switch to investments that you can live with.
“The textbook answer is to find an asset allocation that you can live with for a long time,” he said. But people in distress don’t care about textbooks. “This isn’t science,” he said. “It’s about human behavior. And if you’re freaking out, the first thing is, you’ve got to find a way to get comfortable.”
Perhaps that means getting out of stocks, he said. Better yet, he added, is to find a way to live with stocks. That may mean that you need a more conservative approach than you had expected just a few months ago.
