Top SGX movers of the week: Wilmar, ComfortDelGro, SATS
Here are the top gaining and losing STI Index stocks for the week ending 26 June 2020, based on IG data.
Kelvin Ong | Financial writer, Singapore | Publication date : 2020-06-26T11:14:24+0100
This week, the Straits Times Index (STI Index) fell some 1.7%, as a new wave of Covid-19 infections in the US and mainland Europe caused investors to offload equities and other speculative assets.
Of the 30 blue-chip stocks tracked by the STI, only four companies maintained a share price boost by the end of the week, with the remaining constituents staying in the red or flat.
Another key market headline this week was the Singapore general election . On Tuesday 23 June, Singapore President Halimah Yacob dissolved parliament and issued a Writ of Election. As a result, Singaporeans will vote for a new government on 10 July 2020.
Here are the Singapore Exchange’s (SGX) top gaining and losing stocks for the week ending 26 June 2020.
Are you looking to trade stocks of Singapore companies without having to buy and sell the actual assets? You can explore CFD trading by signing up for an IG account .
Agriculture food producer Wilmar International experienced a larger-than-normal spike as it updated on the status of its Chinese subsidiary Yihai Kerry’s initial public offering on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange.
It finished the week at S$4.17 per share, an increase of 9.16% from an opening mark of S$3.82.
2. Mapletree Industrial Trust share price: +2.81%
Real estate investment trust Mapletree Industrial Trust ended the week at S$2.92 per share, up 2.81% from Monday’s starting bid price of S$2.84.
The stock is up nearly 11% in the month of June 2020.
Transport and taxi operator ComfortDelGro Corporation was the biggest losing stock this week, as it closed proceedings at S$1.52 a share. This represents a decline of 5.6% from Monday’s buy-in rate of S$1.61.
The stock is flat across the month.
Aviation services provider SATS concluded Friday at S$2.98 a share, down 4.5% from Monday’s launch price of S$3.12.
Property developer UOL Group saw its share price descend 4.1% this week, finishing at S$6.80 per share, versus S$7.09 on Monday morning.
UOL closes the month of June 2020 with a 1.35% gain.
Read more: Top 5 Singapore stocks for week ending 19 June: Venture Corp, A-REIT, Thai Bev
Are you feeling bullish or bearish on Wilmar International, ComfortDelGro, SATS and other Straits Times Index (STI Index) stocks? Either way you can buy (long) or sell (short) the asset using derivatives like CFDs offered on IG's industry-leading trading platform in a few easy steps:
IGA, may distribute information/research produced by its respective foreign affiliates within the IG Group of companies pursuant to an arrangement under Regulation 32C of the Financial Advisers Regulations. Where the research is distributed in Singapore to a person who is not an Accredited Investor, Expert Investor or an Institutional Investor, IGA accepts legal responsibility for the contents of the report to such persons only to the extent required by law. Singapore recipients should contact IGA at 6390 5118 for matters arising from, or in connection with the information distributed.
The information/research herein is prepared by IG Asia Pte Ltd (IGA) and its foreign affiliated companies (collectively known as the IG Group) and is intended for general circulation only. It does not take into account the specific investment objectives, financial situation, or particular needs of any particular person. You should take into account your specific investment objectives, financial situation, and particular needs before making a commitment to trade, including seeking advice from an independent financial adviser regarding the suitability of the investment, under a separate engagement, as you deem fit.
Go long or short on thousands of international stocks.
