Britain’s stock market has suffered its worst day since the 2008 financial crisis, as shares plunge worldwide amid fears of a global downturn
The floor of the New York Stock Exchange today, as trading was briefly halted
Finally, today’s wild markets dominate some of Tuesday’s newspapers. Here’s a selection:
Here’s our news story on today’s market rout:
Global stock markets posted their steepest falls since the 2008 financial crisis on Monday after a crash in the oil price amplified concerns about the escalating economic cost of the coronavirus outbreak.
Almost £125bn was wiped off the value of the FTSE 100 in the fifth-worst day in history for the index of leading UK company shares, as it plummeted by 7.7% to finish the day below 6,000 points, its lowest level since straight after the Brexit vote in 2016.
Trading on Wall Street was frozen within minutes of the market opening as the system to buy and sell shares failed to keep pace with events. The Dow Jones closed down by more than 2,000 points for the first time ever, a decline of 7.8%.
On a day of escalating economic losses as countries scrambled to respond to the outbreak, developments included:
The number of deaths in the UK rose from three to five after victims were confirmed in Wolverhampton and St Helier, Jersey. Both were in their 70s and had underlying health conditions.
A scramble to bring home hundreds of British tourists from northern Italy was under way, even as planes continued to fly between Britain and the locked-down region.
Seven Britons tested positive after flying from London to Vietnam alongside an infected 26-year-old woman who had recently travelled to Milan and Paris.
Germany and the Republic of Ireland announced emergency funding packages worth billions of euros, with Berlin declaring that it would do “everything needed to stabilise the economy and secure jobs”.
Here’s confirmation that today’s rout marks the 11th anniversary of the end of the 2008-09 crash:
Interestingly, March 9th marked the lowest close of the S&P 500 Index during the Great Financial Crisis. pic.twitter.com/LzHatP6WZJ
The exterior of the New York Stock Exchange. Photograph: Bryan R Smith/Reuters
Right! I think it’s time for a recap, as traders on Wall Street catch their breath after a shocking day of selling.
World stock markets have suffered their worst day since the global financial crisis of 2008, as fears of a global recession swell .
Hundreds of billions of dollars, euros and pounds were wiped off stocks across the world, in an alarming sell-off.
A collapse in crude prices, triggered by an oil price war, spooked markets which were already reeling from the coronavirus outbreak.
The day began with heavy losses in Asia-Pacific; Australia fell over 7%, while the Nikkei fell over 5%.
In London, the FTSE 100 plunged by 7.7% in a slump led by the energy sector . That put the Footsie into a bear market - down over 20% since January.
More than £125bn was wiped off the Footsie today, extending its recent rout, with BP (-19%) and Royal Dutch Shell (-18%) badly hit.
Other European markets plunged by around 8%, exceeding their worst losses during the debt crisis. Italy’s FTSE MIB tumbled by 11%, after Rome announced plans to quarantine millions of people, as its coronavirus deaths kept rising.
Wall Street picked up the selling baton, and promptly found trading briefly suspended after tumbling 7% -- triggering a circuit breaker. Once trading resumed, the main indices resumed their losses -- posting their worst day since 2008 as well .
Tech shares, banks and energy companies all suffered badly. Apple fell 7.9%, Chevron lost 15% and JP Morgan declined by 13%, in a day when any risers were very rare, and volatility hit an 11-year high.
US and European stock markets tonight Photograph: Refinitiv
Saudi Arabia’s threat to boost oil production and cut prices sent Brent crude down to just $34 per barrel tonight, down 23% today.
Former Treasury secretary Larry Summers, demanded a co-ordinated response to address the impact of Covid-19. Analysts fear that the global economy is heading for very rocky waters due to the coronavirus crisis.
Oxford Economics has warned tonight:
From an economic perspective, the key issue is not just the number of cases of COVID-19, but the level of disruption to economies from containment measures.
Disproportionate action will weaken economic activity and potentially induce panic, increasing the chances of investment and consumer spending being delayed or scrapped.
Actions to control the spread of the virus outside China have been larger than we envisaged even a couple of weeks ago. What’s more, additional restrictions are likely to be rolled out in economies that are particularly exposed to the virus, which will offset any temporary boost to demand from panic buying
We may see MORE losses in Asia and Europe tomorrow, judging by the overnight futures markets.
Panic grips global markets: Trading conditions in global markets can appropriately be described as panicked. Already vulnerable amid the unfolding coronavirus crisis, Saudi Arabia’s pledge to flood global oil markets with extra supply kicked market participants in the guts at precisely the worst possible time. The tumble in global stock markets looks familiar to what’s been experienced the last 3 weeks. But there was a difference to yesterday’s sell-off. Market fundamentals have changed again, and they’ve changed for the worse.
Oil’s plunge sparks credit risk: Oil prices were belted on Monday, plunging by as much as 30 per cent, as traders priced-in the impacts of an extra 10 million barrels per day of Saudi oil supply. The drop-in oil prices is raising concerns that highly leveraged oil companies, many of which that dominate the US junk bond market, will fall into a state of unprofitability, and lack the means to meet their debt obligations. This credit risk is rippling through corporate bond markets, and raising the chance of financial contagion....
Another day of losses for ASX200: It’s setting up Australia’s ASX200 for another 273 point fall according to SPI Futures. The move will come following yesterday’s 7.3 per cent loss – its biggest daily loss since October 2008. The energy sector was the biggest loser, tracking the fall in the price of oil, close the day’s trade 20 per cent lower. The financial sector subtracted the most from the mark in terms of points-lost. It cut 136 point from the index, as investors continue to dump banks in a falling rate environment.
