turned positive in late trade, gaining 38.85 points, or 0.5%, to  end at 8,192.42, its third straight session of gains.
U.S. and European markets were closed Friday for the Good Friday holiday. European markets remained closed Monday for the Easter holiday. The S&P 500 last week jumped 12.1% for its largest weekly rise since 1974, while the Dow advanced 12.7% and the Nasdaq Composite rose 10.6%.
Market Extra: 16 million people just got laid off, but U.S. stocks had their best week in 45 years
“The biggest issue facing the market is when will the economy be opened back up,” said Kent Engelke, chief economic strategist at Capitol Securities Management, in an interview with MarketWatch. “The longer we wait, the greater the damage.”
But Engelke said he’s feeling optimistic about reports of several possible coronavirus vaccines in the works and the potential for the economy to start reopening next month, even through quarterly earnings are kicking off under the cloud of COVID-19.
Bears contend that the rebound off the March 23 lows has gone too far, too fast and that a retest of the downside will likely come as companies continue to downgrade or suspend their outlooks.
“Investors may gain more confidence as the clouds start to clear across the economic chasm, gaining visibility to a return to profitability. That being said, it is not uncommon to see mini-rallies amid ongoing bear markets, followed by further market weakness as new information causes investors to reassess their positions,” wrote analysts at Glenmede, in a note.
Stocks were not helped much by crude prices, which put in a mixed performance late Sunday and Monday . On Sunday, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, Russia and the U.S. completed a deal that would see global output cut by 9.7 million barrels a day beginning in May. After an initial surge , West Texas Intermediate crude for May delivery US:CLK20 lost 35 cents on Monday, or 1.5%, to settle at $22.41 a barrel.
The deal ends a month-long price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia that flooded the world with unneeded crude and intensified a meltdown in oil prices. The selloff in crude prices was seen amplifying volatility across global financial markets as investors reeled from the economic impact of the pandemic and the resulting near-shutdown of much of the world economy.
But analysts had warned that a lasting lift to crude prices could prove elusive given the scale of the hit to demand that had already left the oil market substantially oversupplied.
New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Monday said that New York and five other states will craft a plan to start reopening their economies amid the pandemic, after declaring the “worst is over ” for his state, even as the death toll from COVID-19 in New York topped 10,056. The number of hospitalizations has continued to slow, offering a sign of hope.
See: After worst week of coronavirus deaths, New York starts to see signs of hope
President Donald Trump on Monday also said he’d soon make a decision “in conjunction” with governors and other officials on reopening states. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the top U.S. infectious-disease expert, told CNN on Sunday that the economy in parts of the country could be allowed to reopen as early as May.
Also read: Trump reposts tweet calling for firing of Dr. Fauci
The number of COVID-19 cases around the world rose to 1.87 million on Monday, while the number of fatalities rose to 118,304, according to data compiled by the Johns Hopkins Whiting School of Engineering’s Center for Systems Science and Engineering. The U.S. has the most known cases at 558,526 and the most deaths at 22,146. At least 41,831 Americans have recovered.
Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Richard Clarida on Monday said the U.S. economy remained fundamentally sound and that the central bank wouldn’t need to continue its historic support of financial markets indefinitely.
Which companies were in focus?
Shares of shale producers and major oil companies were mixed in the wake of the deal on output cuts. Shares of Pioneer Natural Resources Co. PXD,
