An index fund is a mutual fund that tracks a particular index. They have a lower expense ratio and also reduce the risk associated with the portfolio as they are of diversified nature.
An index fund is a mutual fund that tracks a particular index and is best suited for risk-averse investors. If you want to get exposure to the equity market with less cost, you can invest in them. They are less volatile as compared to large-cap fund and also offers decent returns.
The fund manager does not exercise his own discretion in-stock selection in an index fund. As they track broad-based indices, they are less risky and offers a low-cost way for the investors to track stock and bond market indices. Thus, if you want to get predictable returns and have a low appetite for risk, index funds are a perfect investment option.
In case of an index fund, team of analysts who perform research and helps the fund manager in finding stocks is not required as they replicate the index and involves no active buying and selling of stocks.
As compared to an actively managed fund, index funds have lower expense ratio and also reduce the risk associated with the portfolio as they are of diversified nature.
Index funds perform well and are fit for well-organised markets.
Also, investors need not worry about the performance of specific funds and these funds are accessible and convenient to invest as well. They also cover all the key sectors of the economy and the relevant stock within each sector.
As they are passively managed, the management fees are much lower than other funds. Also, index funds tend to have lower mutual fund expense ratios than other mutual funds and this fund don't require explicit tracking.
Before investing in an index fund, one must go for the funds which have minimum tracking error. As index funds replicate the performance of an index, at times, there may be a slight deviation from the returns offered by the index. This is referred to as tracking error. If you have a lower tracking error, it represents a better fund performance.
It is advisable to have a mix of the index and actively managed funds in your portfolio as, during a market slump, the valuation associated with index funds may also go down. They are less prone to equity-related volatility and risks as they map an index.
One must go for an index fund which has a lower expense ratio as it will deliver high returns. Index funds have lower expense ratio in comparison to actively-managed funds as the index funds portfolio need not be passively managed and also the fund manager is not required to formulate any investment strategy.
An index fund is suitable for investors who are looking for long term investment horizon. During short-run, the fund experiences many fluctuations thus one must invest in them for at least 7 years to expect good returns ranging from 10-12%. Thus, only when one sticks around the fund for that long, it will perform to its full potential.
Investors can earn capital gains if they redeem the units of index funds. Also, they are taxable and the rate depends on the holding period.
