This goes a long way to explaining why, if you choose your own investments instead of just investing in an S&P 500 fund, your own stock portfolio may be lagging that mighty index.
If you can’t beat ‘em, join ‘em?
So, why not just join the crowd and pile into S&P 500-linked investments? Invest in the “market” instead of trying to beat it? That sounds good in the rear-view mirror. And, there is no denying that it has been a top strategy the past few years. However, it is also possible that at this stage, it’s a trap. That trap could crush your retirement portfolio if you are not careful. Here is some history to show you why.
To me, this is the period of contemporary stock market history that reminds me most of the current inter-market performance trend. It is the 3 years that preceded the bursting of the Dot-Com bubble, 1997-1999. As with recent times, the S&P 500 was in a performance class by itself.
If you are looking for the S&P 500 in this chart of indexes from January 2000 through March of 2003 (”The Dot-Com Bust”), keep going down until you hit the one that dropped over 37% in 39 months. Of course, history does not repeat itself. However, this is a simple reminder that investing what just did well, or what you wish you had just invested in, is not a strategy. It’s a performance-chase. Don’t do it.
Do some introspective thinking about what you really want out of your stock portfolio. Do you want “the market” for better or worse? Or, do you want to use the market as a tool to engineer the return stream you need to get you retired or keep you retired? That may involve an allocation to S&P 500-type investments. But most likely, there will be a heavy emphasis on risk management, so that you don’t end up with a volatile retirement portfolio.
Then, do your research. Don’t just settle for what has been working. Seek to understand why it is working and why it isn’t. Heck, during the Dot-Com Bust (the last chart above), those same Small Cap Value stocks went from laggards to leaders. However, that may not be the case the next time around. Conditions are different today. Applying some common sense and deductive reasoning when you invest for retirement is very helpful to your process. It can also help you keep your sanity when “the market” again becomes a threat to retirement dreams, instead of the boost it has been the past few years.
Comments provided are informational only, not individual investment advice or recommendations. Sungarden provides Advisory Services through Dynamic Wealth Advisors
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former
I spent the first decade of my career on Wall Street. I have spent the last 2 decades helping people understand Wall Street.  A thought-leader, 3-time author and former mutual fund manager.  My work for Forbes.com aims to break investment myths and bring common sense analysis to my audience. My firm's website is www.SungardenInvestment.com.  Connect with me on Linked In, follow me on Twitter @robisbitts. Financial Advisors can visit www.TheHedgedInvestor.com for more.
