Share Market LIVE: SGX Nifty signals muted start for Sensex, Nifty; Fitch cuts India growth projection for FY22
“Depending on the outstanding value of the five securities, India could become a part of an index such as the JP Morgan Global EM Index or the Bloomberg Global Bond Index Fund. This is definitely a boost for the bond markets,” Jayesh Mehta, country treasurer, Bank of America, told FE. “Once the weightage in the index is known, the investors who follow the index will buy into these securities,” Mehta said.
These specified securities, once so designated, would continue to be eligible for investment by residents and would remain eligible for investment under the FAR until maturity, the RBI said. The government had announced in the Union Budget 2020-21 that certain specified categories of Central government securities would be opened fully for non-resident investors without any restrictions, apart from being available to domestic investors as well.
Of the five securities made eligible under FAR, two 5-year papers mature in 2024, two 10-year bonds mature in 2029 and one 30-year paper matures in 2049. “In addition, all new issuances of government securities of 5-year, 10-year and 30-year tenors from the financial year 2020-21 will be eligible for investment under the FAR as ‘specified securities’,” the RBI said in a statement.
The RBI also notified on Monday that it has increased the limit for FPI investment in corporate bonds to 15% of the outstanding stock for the fiscal year 2020-21 FY21. As a result, the revised limit for FPI investment will stand at Rs 4.29 lakh crore for the first half of FY21 and will increase to Rs 5.41 lakh crore for the second half of the fiscal. According to data on NSDL, Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) have utilised just 54.65% of the investment limits in corporate bonds as on March 27. Since January, FPIs have sold a net $1.6 billion of corporate bonds.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
