The financial markets are very unstable right now. The coronavirus pandemic is having a bad effect on the global economy. There is very little activity taking place. Thus, people are facing many problems. Many countries are in lockdown right now. Due to this, many companies are not earning any money right now. Therefore, investor confidence in stock markets is also low.
But, the markets have not always been going down. During the pandemic, people are seeing that the market has also risen on a few days. This has been happening because people get optimistic if they think the lockdown is going to end, or the government is going to reduce the restrictions. This is reducing investor confidence even more because they do not like to invest in volatile markets.
Despite the volatility in the US markets, the US dollar rose against the Yen and the Euro on 11 May 2020. This has been confusing some investors. The US is the worst-hit country in the world. Its economy is among those suffering the most. The rise, however, comes because many investors are trying to protect the US dollars. They are worried about the US’s ability to recover from the pandemic, and the rise is to protect the dollar against other currencies.
China Reduces Investment In US: Ghosts Of 2009? Impact On US-China Financial Relations
US Index futures such as Dow Average , S&P 500, and NASDAQ 100 were all up around 0.6% on late Sunday. The indices have been rallying for about a week, and they started off slow on Sunday. But then they started shooting higher through the day. This comes on the heels of rising people expectations of an economic bounce back as businesses around the world start to open.
Investor confidence continues to remain low. Many US companies are seeing their share price fall fast as they worry about the situation in the country. Donald Trump is trying to convince people that it is safe to work again. Due to the rising cases, many are not going back. Additionally, Trump is also coming under criticism for how he is handling things. This is also reducing confidence.
