The velocity of the fall in stocks has been sharp across markets in Asia, Europe, and America
Last Updated at February 29, 2020 14:30 IST
Enter the characters shown in the image.
Most global markets have suffered their worst weekly setback since the 2008 global financial crisis, as the coronavirus outbreak triggered a flight to safety among investors. While equity markets have tumbled, bond markets have rallied with the yield on the US treasury dropping below 1.2 per cent, lowest since 2016.
The velocity of the fall in stocks has been sharp across markets in Asia, Europe, and America. The S&P500 index has made a record of entering a correction zone — a fall of over 10 per cent —in the shortest time frame of just six trading sessions. Indian ...
TO READ THE FULL STORY, SUBSCRIBE NOW NOW AT JUST Rs
Key stories on business-standard.com are available to premium subscribers only.
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
Unlimited access to all the content on any device through browser or app.
Exclusive content, features, opinions and comment – hand-picked by our editors, just for you.
Pick 5 of your favourite companies. Get a daily email with all the news updates on them.
Track the industry of your choice with a daily newsletter specific to that industry.
Stay on top of your investments. Track stock prices in your portfolio.
18 years of archival data.
The product is a monthly auto renewal product.
Cancellation Policy: You can cancel any time in the future without assigning any reasons, but 48 hours prior to your card being charged for renewal.
			We do not offer any refunds.
To cancel, communicate from your registered email id and send the email with the cancellation request to assist@bsmail.in . Include your contact number for speedy action. 
			Requests mailed to any other ID will not be acknowledged or actioned upon.
Pay using an instrument of your choice - Credit/Debit Cards, Net Banking, Payment Wallets accepted
Pay using an instrument of your choice ( Cards - Debit/Credit, Wallets, Net Banking)
Note: Subscription will be auto renewed, you may cancel any time in the future without any questions asked.
