The Korea Exchange (KRX) suspended the availability of Kospi 200 futures and mini futures contracts listed for trading on the CME Globex trading platform after April 6, 2020. Previously, the contracts were available on CME Globex for trading during KRX overnight trading hours. The Kospi 200 futures and mini futures contracts remain available on KRX during Seoul business hours.
KRX took this step in response to a change in the status of the Kospi 200 index from a broad-based to a narrow-based security index as of April 1, thus changing the regulatory oversight of its futures contracts from broad-based non-US security index futures contracts prior to April 1 under the oversight of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission in the US to narrow-based non-US security index security futures contracts under the oversight of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the CFTC in the US as of April 1.
Security futures contracts are both securities and futures contracts under applicable law. They can be based on a narrow-based security index or on an individual security. A security index will be deemed narrow-based if it satisfies any of one of four enumerated tests in an applicable rule, including that the index has nine or fewer component securities; any one component security constitutes more than 30 percent of the index's weighting; or the five highest weighted component securities constitute more than 60 percent of the index's weighting. (Click here to view all four tests at 7 U.S.C. §1a(35)(A).) Generally, a broad-based security index is one that is not narrow-based. (Click here for a CFTC overview of security futures and futures on broad-based security indexes.)
The Kospi 200 index changed status as of April 1 because the weight of a one component stock – Samsung Electronics Co.– exceeded 30% of the weight of the overall index for more than 45 days during the prior three consecutive calendar months.
Whereas broad-based non-US security-index futures contracts are authorized to be traded by all US persons, non-US security-index security futures contracts may only potentially be accessed by (1) certain sophisticated investors known as “qualified institutional buyers” (click here for a definition of QIB under 17 CFR §230.144A(a)(1)); (2) persons who are not US persons as defined under the SEC’s Regulation S (click here to access 17 CFR § 230.902(k)) and (3) registered broker-dealers (among other enumerated intermediaries) if also registered or noticed registered as a futures commission merchant and effecting transactions for a QIB or non-US person if certain enumerated conditions are satisfied. (Click here to access a relevant 2010 CFTC Division of Clearing and Intermediary Oversight Advisory.) One of the conditions is that closing transactions cannot be executed on an exchange required to be registered with the SEC as a national securities exchange. (Click here to access SEC Release No 34-60194 (June 30, 2009) pgs. 24 -28; see also 15 U.S.C. §78e.)
In suspending access to the Kospi 200 security futures contracts through the CME Globex trading platform, KRX appeared to have had some concerns that its use of Globex potentially implicated national securities exchange registration and/or other SEC requirements.
Separately, a federal district court in New York granted Tower Research Capital LLC et al. summary judgment on its Commodity Exchange Act claims in its effort to dismiss a putative class-action lawsuit filed by five Korea-based traders against it related to its trading of Kospi 200 futures on KRX utilizing the CME Globex trading platform. Plaintiffs had alleged that the defendants manipulated the price of Kospi 200 futures through spoofing practices. (Click here to access CEA §9(1).) The court based its decision on the ground that manipulation of futures contracts is only actionable under US law if the transactions occur on or subject to the rules of a registered entity. The court held that transactions on CME Globex that settled on KRX – a non-registered CFTC exchange – were not transactions on or subject to CME rules, and thus it was irrelevant that CME itself was a designated contract market licensed by the CFTC.
Legal Weeds: In 2013, the SEC issued a report of investigation finding that Eurex Deutschland offered and sold security futures contracts based on the EURO STOXX Banks Index in the US through direct market access, and as a result should have been registered as a national securities exchange or been exempted from registration by it. The SEC also found that Eurex engaged in an unlawful offer and sale of securities in interstate commerce in the US because no registration statement was in effect for the relevant security futures. (Click here to access 15 U.S.C. 77e(a) and (c).)
Previously, CFTC staff authorized Eurex to offer and sell futures on the Banks Index on April 2, 2002, utilizing its terminals in the US in part because the contract was based on a broad-based security index. After September 2011, however, Eurex discovered that the Banks Index had morphed to a narrow-based security index in January 2010 because in excess of 60% of the weight of the overall index comprised the five highest weighted component securities. As a result, after a three-month grace period, the futures transformed from a futures contract solely under the oversight of the CFTC to a security futures contract under the joint oversight of the SEC as a security and the CFTC as a futures contract.
On October 21, 2011, Eurex self-reported to the SEC and CFTC that it had not caught the transition at the relevant time, and that, as a result, from April 2010 through October 2011 it sold six million futures contracts worldwide on the Banks Index through 79 foreign-based intermediaries and direct market terminals in the US. The SEC said that Eurex’s conduct resulted in 120,000 security futures being sold to US persons during the relevant time without compliance with applicable securities laws.
Eurex was solely reprimanded through a public “21A Order” and not otherwise sanctioned for its violations. (Click here to access SEC Release No. 70148 (August 8, 2013).
Eurex also offered and sold mini-Kospi 200 daily futures contracts to US participants prior to March 27, 2020. However, in response to the evolution of the contract from a broad-based to a narrow-based non-US security index contract, it required all US persons to close out all their positions by March 27, while the product was still solely under the jurisdiction of the CFTC. Eurex noted in a press release that, beginning April 1, trading of its mini Kospi 200 daily futures contract would have to be conducted “in accordance with both the U.S. securities and commodity futures laws.” (Click here to access the relevant Eurex press release (March 20, 2020).)
Last year on November 18, the Minneapolis Grain Exchange in conjunction with the Miami International Securities Exchange launched a futures contract on the SPIKES Volatility Index after it self-certified the contract with the CFTC as based on a broad‑based security index. (Click here to access the relevant press release). However, within days of the futures contracts’ launch, MGEX suspended all trading on November 29, “pending final resolution of the product’s classification by the [CFTC] and the [SEC].” MGEX said that “[d]elisting SPIKES Futures allows MGEX sufficient time to work together with the CFTC and SEC to resolve the classification of the product as expeditiously as possible.” (Click here for MGEX December 6, 2019 relevant announcement; click here for additional information on SPIKES Futures.)
Futures based on security indexes can easily change from broad-based (solely under the CFTC’s oversight) to narrow‑based (under joint CFTC and SEC oversight) back to broad-based again (solely under the CFTC’s oversight). The challenge to get it right – and timely doing so – applying the various tests under applicable law is a challenge created by the bifurcated regulation of securities and derivatives in the US by the CFTC and SEC.
