The Australian sharemarket is poised for solid gains this morning after Wall Street advanced on the back of positive vaccine developments and better-than-expected manufacturing data. Shortly before 7am AEST, futures are pointing to a gain of 42 points, or 0.7 per cent, at the open.
The Australian dollar also moved higher as the risk-on sentiment dented the greenback. The Aussie is fetching around 69.15 US cents just before 8am AEST.
Positive vaccine developments sent Wall Street higher.
1. US stocks jump, on latest reports of COVID-19 vaccine: US stocks finished a turbulent session overnight in the black, ostensibly off-the-back of reports released by drug company Pfizer and bio-tech firm BioNTech, that they’re seeing early success with their COVID-19 vaccine.
Never ones to abandon hope in favour of reality, US stocks popped on the news, shrugging off what was an otherwise mixed day’s new flow for global markets. The S&P500 added 0.5 per cent, led by gains in defensive sectors, while the NASDAQ jumped 0.95 per cent, to record a new all-time closing high. The US VIX also eased back below 30 for the first time in three weeks.
2. COVID-19 cases continue to climb in US: Optimism about a possible COVID-19 vaccine outweighed what was another bad day’s data on COVID-19 cases in the US last night. The rate of new cases leapt 1.8 per cent across the US, with the state of California, and the state of Arizona reporting their highest daily jump in coronavirus cases since the pandemic began, and the state of Texas reporting its highest ever active case numbers.
Despite the dour news, risk-assets pushed ahead, as several US states continue to delay the re-opening of their economies, and even re-impose some social distancing measures.
3. US economic data bolsters "V-shaped recovery" crowd: Market participants are perhaps looking through the jump in the US’s virus caseload, as US economic data continues to show a recovering economy.US ISM Manufacturing PMI jumped by much more than estimated last month, and revealed manufacturing activity in the US is at an over 1 year high, as some corners of the market continue to call a “V-shaped” recovery.
The solid manufacturing figures drove the market to largely over look disappointing ADP employment data last night, which hinted that the US economy added few jobs last month than analysts have estimated.
4. Markets continue to shrug-off burning US-China tensions: Also and one again: heightened trade and diplomatic risks between the US and China has been shrugged off by the market.
In a new escalation of diplomatic tensions, the US announced it would be rolling out sanctions against Chinese officials implicated in human rights abuses against China’s Uighur minority in Xinjiang province. That news flowed on from developments in Asian trade yesterday, whereby Hong Kong authorities for the first time arrested several Free Hong Kong protesters utilising Beijing’s newly minted Hong Kong security bill.
5. FOMC minutes dodge the subject of yield-curve-control: The minutes of the US Federal Reserve’s last meeting temporarily shifted markets at the margin in US trade.
The US Dollar recovered a portion of its intraday losses, while US Treasury yields, especially at the short-end, lifted, after the Fed danced around the notion of a yield-curve-control program as a possible, new policy tool. On paper a disappointment to market participants, the Fed’s minutes revealed a central bank more interested in utilising greater its “forward-guidance” powers to support the economy in the short-term.
6. Oil prices climb on big US crude inventory drawdown: Oil prices rose in sympathy with broader-risk assets in US trade, after US Crude inventory numbers showed a much bigger than expected drawdown in US crude stockpiles last week. The headlines numbers revealed a drawdown of -7.2 million barrels, versus a forecast -0.9 million drawdown, and aided an over 1 per cent rally in both Brent and WTI prices overnight.
The jump in oil prices failed to translate into meaningful gains for US energy stocks, however, with the inventory report showing there was a larger than expected drop in US oil exports last week.
7. ASX200 to rise, ahead of a day focus on US jobs: Wall Street’s positive lead is setting up the ASX200 for a solid start this morning. SPI Futures are pointing 0.71 per cent pop for the index at the open, backing up a day yesterday which rallied 0.62 per cent, led by solid gains in real estate and information technology stocks.
It shapes up as a big day in global markets today. The focus will be on positioning ahead of tonight US jobless claims and US Non-Farm Payrolls figures – the latter being reported a day early this month, as US markets clock-off early this week for the Independence Day holiday.
This column was produced in commercial partnership between The Sydney Morning Herald, The Age and IG
Information is of a general nature only.
