With just 3.5% away from 52-week high, Bharti Airtel stock getting back to its competitive best
As countries across the globe started opening up, refiners were the first to ramp up utilization rates, and thus, their output. “In April, total refinery utilization in India stood at 70%, with the utilization of IOCL and BPCL refineries at 52-63% (which have been ramped up to 80-83% currently), and robust utilization from HPCL and RIL ’s refineries at 83- 92% respectively,” the report added. The demand for petroleum products in India, down between 30%-50% on-year is also expected to ramp up soon. Despite this, refining margins are expected to remain suppressed in the short term as the market balances the quick jump in supply over the modest revival in demand. Refiners in India are likely to report inventory gain in the first quarter of this fiscal against the huge inventory loss in the last quarter.
Indian Oil share price is down 28% since the beginning of this year while that of Hindustan Petroleum is down 20% in the same period. Along with these shares of Bharat Petroleum are also down 22% year-to-date, however, the stock has staged a sharp surge of 45% since their March lows. “With the benign Brent price environment along with high volatility in prices and Singapore GRM still trending in the negative territory (-USD1.6/bbl in June Year-to-date v/s -USD1.5/bbl in May), global oil and gas companies are facing a threat to their profitability and outlook,” Motilal Oswal said. The cut in capital expenditure and decrease in production by most oil and gas companies, the central government’s aim of selling state-run BPCL.
The brokerage firm is bullish on Indian Oil and has termed it as its top pick, valuing it at  1.2x FY22E PBV with a target price of Rs 168 per share. HPCL also has a buy rating with a target price of Rs 330 per share. However, Motilal Oswal has a neutral rating on BPCL and a target price of Rs 426 as chances of divestment run slim under the current environment.
Get live Stock Prices from BSE , NSE , US Market and latest NAV, portfolio of Mutual Funds , calculate your tax by Income Tax Calculator , know market’s Top Gainers , Top Losers & Best Equity Funds . Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter .
Financial Express is now on Telegram. Click here to join our channel and stay updated with the latest Biz news and updates.
