Asian National Oil Companies need Brent crude at $57 to break-even in 2020-2021: Wood Mac
While Asian upstream players are expected to face significant headwinds, downstream entities are expected to gain from the oil market share war between OPEC, Russia and the United States.
New Delhi: Asian National Oil Companies (NOCs) will have a tough time balancing national obligations with commercial decisions amid a global collapse in oil prices, research and consultancy firm Wood Mackenzie said, adding the NOCs would require Brent crude at $57 to break-even in 2020-2021.
“We see companies would require $57 per barrel price for break-even, from a cash-flow basis. So this includes their base businesses, downstream, exploration interest, dividends, everything really,” Max Petrov, Principal Analyst, Corporate Research at Wood Mackenzie said in a webinar titled ‘Navigating Oil Price Crash in Asia Pacific’.
Petrov noted that cash flow for some upstream players with downstream exposure will be somewhat cushioned and NOCs may not cut spending this year.
“Difficulties for the NOCs are that they have national obligations and they have to balance that with their commercial decision making. We have already seen ONGC and Petronas for example that they will not change their spending this year. We expect a similar message from the Chinese NOCs later this month,” Petrov said.
India's state-owned Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) had earlier this week declared 100 per cent interim dividend.
While Asian upstream players are expected to face significant headwinds, downstream entities are expected to gain from the oil market share war between OPEC, Russia and the United States.
“This crude market share competition will be beneficial for refiners as it provides ample crude choices to maximise margins," Sushant Gupta, Research Director, Asia Pacific Refining and Oil Markets said.
He added the refiners must prepare to process more diverse and spot crudes and a large increase in OPEC crude will also mean a wider crude price differential between light crude brent and heavy crude such as Dubai so this will be beneficial for the complex and deep conversion refiners in Asia such as Reliance and Nayara Energy in India and Sinopec and PetroChina in China.
Gupta added that low oil prices tend to stimulate oil demand in large oil consuming regions such as Asia. However, the extent to which low oil prices will help oil demand recover this time around will be limited by the containment measures taken to limit the Covid-19 outbreak.
Gupta said that Asian refining margins in 2020 are expected to be the lowest in 20-25 years.
