Australian shares are set to open higher, extending Monday's 7% surge.
ASX futures were up 66 points or 1.3% to 5257 near 7am AEDT. The local currency was flat, reversing earlier modest losses.
Shares closed higher across Europe. In New York, the Dow rose 691 points or 3.2% to retake the 22,000 level. The S&P 500 ended 3.4% higher, the Nasdaq advanced 3.6%.
One potential reason for the rally was attributed to buying by balanced funds as month-end approaches, and there could be more of that in the next 24 hours, NAB's Ray Attrill said in a morning note.
Oil benchmark Brent crude plunged to its cheapest in 18 years, while US crude fell below $US20 per barrel, on growing fears the global coronavirus shutdown could last months and demand for fuel could decline further.
With Saudi Arabia and Russia set to flood the market with oil next month, producers and shippers have been scrambling to lock oil up in storage as demand falls.
Bank of America lowered its oil price forecasts for the second time in two weeks after the bank's economists projected global GDP would contract in the first half of 2020.
"On a quarterly basis, we expect to see the steepest decline in global oil consumption ever recorded," BofA analysts said, reflecting a 12 million barrel per day (bpd) drop in the second quarter of 2020 and a 4.5 million-bpd contraction for the year.
BofA reduced its 2020 price forecasts to $US37 per barrel for Brent and $US32 for WTI, and said it expects both benchmarks will trade in the teens in coming weeks.
Trade ministers from the Group of 20 major economies convened an extraordinary video conference on Monday (Tuesday AEDT) to come to grips with the blow to global trade from the coronavirus pandemic and weigh how to overcome supply chain disruptions.
They said they would ensure the flow of goods including vital medical supplies and resolve disruptions caused by border closures by national governments anxious to limit transmissions of the virus.
But they stopped short of calling for an end to export bans that many countries, including G20 members France, Germany and India, have enacted on drugs and medical supplies. Lack of protective gear is putting doctors and nurses at risk.
Overseas data: China manufacturing, nonmanufacturing PMIs March; Japan industrial output February; Euro zone March CPI; UK GfK consumer sentiment March; US S&P CoreLogic CS house prices January, Chicago PMI March, Consumer confidence index March
TD Securities on the pending China data: "Following the dramatic decline in China's manufacturing PMI in Feb, some recovery is likely; we expect a bounce, albeit still in contraction, from 35.7 to 42.0 in March. Our rationale is based on an improvement in high frequency indicators and the opening up of a large proportion of Chinese industry. However, a 'V' shape recovery is far from likely as growth in the US and Europe tanks, resulting in at least at 20-30% decline in China's external trade. Separately, weak PPI will translate into declining profits, adding another blow to manufacturers."
Morrison's $130b to save six million jobs : Almost half the workforce will receive $1500 a fortnight for the next six months under a $130 billion wage subsidy, news of which drove the biggest jump in the sharemarket for 40 years.
Jennifer Hewett: Scott Morrison's $130b bet to save the economy : Scott Morrison and Josh Frydenberg knew they had to upend their previous reluctance to provide wage subsidies. And they have, big time.
Banks to be tested in 'redemption moment' : The pledge made by the big banks to back their customers is about to be tested when they start choosing which businesses to save or let fail, as the biggest demand shock in 100 years batters the economy.
Morgan Stanley cautiously optimistic: "We believe excess leverage – both in corporate credit and in shadow banking – is why the move has been so ferocious. With forced liquidation now behind us, unprecedented monetary and fiscal support, and elevated equity risk premia, we stick to our view that the worst is behind us and current levels are buying points on a 6-12 month horizon.
"We're not saying it's a straight line up from here, and a pull-back is likely in order after last week's rally. However, our base case is that the lows are in for this bear market for most stocks."
MS sees rotation to value: "We think groups where performance is correlated to sales growth, expectations are not yet reflecting recession style declines, and multiples are still elevated vs history pose the most risk – Tech Hardware and Software stand out.
"The importance of these groups to Growth means that whatever retest of recent lows we get in the coming week(s) will likely be driven more by Growth than Value on the downside. This should be the beginning of the long-awaited rotation to Value that we said would require a recession, which has now arrived."
Bank of America's outlook: "The S&P 500 got its fastest 30% sell - off ever as the equity market quickly discounted a US recession. The 2020 correction of 33.92% from the 2/19 peak into last Monday's (3/23) low achieved the median cyclical bear market of 33.63% going back to 1928, but cyclical bear markets have lasted much longer than the 23 trading days between 2/19 and 3/23, which suggests that a period of base-building is likely.
"Recent big oversold indicator levels are aligned with those from prior bottoming processes, and last Tuesday's (3/24) 90% up day was bullish response to these oversold indicators. This suggests that a base-building or bottoming process may have begun."
BofA also said: "The 3/23 low on the SPX has the potential to mark "an internal" low that coincides with the big oversold extremes. While the SPX can retest or undercut its price low, many indicators have the potential to hold their "internal low" extreme levels and improve with positive divergences or higher lows as part of a base-building or bottoming process."
Macy's said on Monday it would furlough most of its employees starting this week as all stores of the department chain operator stay closed to curb the spread of the coronavirus.
The company, which has about 130,000 employees, earlier this month shut its more than 800 stores, suspended quarterly dividend and withdrew its 2020 forecasts. It has also drawn down all its available credit and frozen hiring and spending to offset the impact of the pandemic on sales.
Europe races to start mass testing, ramp up medical production : Some countries are making hopeful noises about progress towards the pandemic's peak, but lockdowns endure.
Britain's Aston Martin is furloughing some employees as it handles the fallout from the coronavirus outbreak which has closed its car factories as production of its first sport utility vehicle ramps up, the luxury carmaker said on Monday.
European stocks closed higher on Monday after last-minute gains, with buying focused largely on defensive sectors amid plummeting oil prices and continued anxiety over the coronavirus.
The pan-European STOXX 600 index closed up 1.1%, having dropped about 1% earlier in the day. A stronger open on Wall Street, spurred by optimism over battling the outbreak's economic impact, also lent support late in the European session.
Still, the benchmark was a long way from a peak hit in late-February, and likely to record its second-worst quarter ever, owing to the panic selling brought about by the coronavirus.
The healthcare sector was the biggest boost to the STOXX 600, closing about 3% higher as fears of the coronavirus kept investors trading cautiously. Utilities and telecom stocks also rose on the day.
Belgian-Dutch biotech company Galapagos jumped about 6% after Jefferies upgraded the stock to 'buy', citing potential in the firm's lead product.
Hong Kong stocks settled lower on Monday as investors braced for a deep recession in the global economy with more countries tightening or imposing lockdowns to contain the spread of the coronavirus outbreak.
At the close of trade, the Hang Seng index was down 309.17 points, or 1.32%, at 23,175.11. The Hang Seng China Enterprises index fell 1.08% to 9402.17.
China's main Shanghai Composite index closed down 0.9% at 2,747.21, while the blue-chip CSI300 index ended down 0.97%.
The benchmark Nikkei average dropped 1.6% to 19,084.97 on Monday after Friday's 3.9% gain.
The Nikkei's volatility index, a measure of investors' volatility expectations based on option pricing and considered to be a fear gauge, rose 4.2% to 54.98, but still off a nine-year peak of 60.86 hit on March 16.
Pantheon Macroeconomics on falling Chinese rates: "All these rates look likely to go lower in coming months, with Friday's politburo meeting sending a firm message in that direction. Ma Jun, a key PBoC adviser also iterated the message when talking to media after yesterday's rate cut. But we reckon the authorities easily could go further and introduce a QE programme. The politburo meeting strongly signalled a significant expansion of fiscal policy, promising to raise the fiscal deficit ratio "appropriately"."
Aluminium prices hit four-year lows on Monday as worries about prolonged shutdowns around the world due to the coronavirus reinforced fears of a deep recession and tumbling demand for industrial metals.
Benchmark aluminium on the London Metal Exchange was down 1.1% to $US1529 a tonne at 1706 GMT. Prices of the metal used widely in transport and packaging earlier touched $US1526.50, the lowest since April 2016.
Aluminium stocks in LME-approved warehouses, at 1.15 million tonnes, have climbed nearly 20% since March 17.
Stocks of the metal in warehouses monitored by the Shanghai Futures Exchange fell 5922 tonnes last week to 528,072 tonnes; it was less than 190,000 tonnes at the start of the year.
However, analysts expect deliveries to ShFE warehouses to rise further over coming weeks.
Data from Marex Spectron shows the net speculative short position rose to 47% of open interest or 260,000 tonnes as of last Thursday.
"This is the largest short seen in aluminium since July 2012, on our estimates. That year the short peaked at 67% of open interest," Marex said in a note.
Royal Dutch Shell pulled out of a major liquefied natural gas (LNG) export plant under development in Louisiana following the recent crash in oil and natural gas prices that has forced the company to make deep spending cuts.
Energy Transfer LP, which was developing the project with Shell, said it remains focused on the commercial development of Lake Charles and is working toward making an early 2021 final investment decision.
The Australian sharemarket soared in its best session in 40 years on Monday after the federal government unveiled a further $130 billion stimulus package.
The S&P/ASX 200 Index rose 339 points, or 7 per cent, to 5181.4, with the market jumping 2.4 per cent in the final 10 minutes. The late jump saw $102 billion added to the boards throughout the session, and $35 billion added in the settlement period alone.
