The oil and gas major will unveil its first quarter results next week, with the stock coming under pressure amid the collapse in oil prices as demand dries up due to the Covid-19 pandemic.
Aaran Fronda | Financial writer, London | Publication date : 2020-04-21T14:45:00+0100
Overnight the price of US crude fell into negative territory, driving down the share price of oil major BP , with it trading 4% lower on Tuesday.
The decline in oil prices is bad news for BP, which is set to unveil its first quarter (Q1) earnings next week, with the company left uncertain about how long commodity pricing will remain depressed or when demand will return.
In a trading update at the start of April, the oil major said that it continues to monitor the impact of the Covid-19 crisis on its global operations and said that while there has been no significant operational impact in Q1, things could change through Q2.
‘At BP we are mobilising in our own way across the BP world, taking action with three clear objectives: protecting our people; supporting the communities where we live and work; and strengthening our finances,’ BP CEO Bernard Looney said.
BP is trading at 288p as of 13:10 (GMT) on Tuesday.
BP shares have resumed their downward move, at least for the time being, according to Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG.
Crucially, the bounce from the March lows ran out of momentum as it reached the gap down from the beginning of March.
This failure to close the gap is a bearish development, as is the creation of the lower high in early April below 380p. The retreat continues, and a move below 280p strengthens the hand of the sellers. Continued declines head to 220p, the lows from mid-March.
The US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) is trading at -$3.70 a barrel, prompting Brent crude to fall as much as 20% to slip below $20 a barrel on Tuesday – its lowest level since 2002.
The collapse of US crude was driven by weakening demand for oil as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic and global storage facilities reaching their limit.
In an interview with Bloomberg, Gerard Paulides CFO at Vopak, the world’s largest oil storage company, explained how all of its space for crude and refined products has run out due to the Covid-19 crisis.
‘The available capacity on the oil side is almost completely sold out for our terminals,’ Paulides said.
‘For Vopak, worldwide available capacity that is not in maintenance is almost all gone and from what I hear elsewhere in the world we’re not the only ones,’ he added.
Looking to trade BP and other stocks? Open a live or demo account with IG and buy (long) or sell (short) the asset using derivatives like CFDs and spread bets in a few easy steps:
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Market volatility continues as coronavirus concerns amplify. Trade with IG and take advantage of:
Tight spreads – from just 1 point on major indices, and 2.8 on US crude
Guaranteed stops – they’re free to use, and only incur a fee when triggered
