Brent Crude has increased from $27.34 to $32 per barrel, as 15:40pm Nigerian time on Thursday April 2, 2020.
Brent Crude has increased from $27.34 to $32 per barrel, as 15:40pm Nigerian time on Thursday April 2, 2020. The crude rose by 18.5 % as at the time of coverage.
West Texas Intermediate crude gained 9.6%, to $22.80 per barrel, after slipping 0.8% to settle at $20.31 yesterday . Brent crude surged 10% to $27.34 a barrel, as at 13.15 Nigerian time on Thursday.
West Texas Intermediate crude lost 66.5% in the first quarter of 2020, the biggest quarterly percentage loss based on records dating back to 1983. Brent crude also plunged 65.6% in the same quarter, the largest quarterly fall based on records dating to 1988.
In addition, China is moving ahead with plans to purchase more crude oil for its emergency reserves after an epic price fall.
The world’s biggest crude oil importer is taking advantage of a 60% plunge in crude oil prices this year to buy up cheaper oil barrels for its reserves.
Consequently, Thursday showed optimism on at least one front of the dual issues facing the energy industry.
“I have confidence in both that they’ll be able to work it out,” Trump said yesterday at a White House press briefing.
Abiola has spent about 14 years in journalism. His career has covered some top local print media like TELL Magazine, Broad Street Journal, The Point Newspaper.
The Bloomberg MEI alumni has interviewed some of the most influential figures of the IMF, G-20 Summit, Pre-G20 Central Bank Governors and Finance Ministers, Critical Communication World Conference.
The multiple award winner is variously trained in business and markets journalism at Lagos Business School, and Pan-Atlantic University.
You may contact him via email - abiola.odutola@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
The Minister emphasized the President’s vision of lifting 100 million Nigerians out of poverty.
The Minister of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and Social Development, Sadiya Umar Farouq, has said that about 109,823 beneficiaries of the N-Power programme now have their own businesses.
This represents about 22% of the 500,000 Nigerians that have benefited from this programme since its inception.
This was disclosed in a statement by the Minister’s Special Assistant on Strategic Communications, Mrs Halima Oyelade on Saturday, July 4, 2020. She said that the beneficiaries of Batch A and B of N-Power have established businesses in their communities.
The Minister in the statement said, “Statistics like this gives me joy and once again, I want to say congratulations; I look forward to hearing amazing testimonies and meeting beneficiaries of this programme who will be doing great things in the future”.
She emphasized President Muhammadu Buhari’s vision of lifting 100 million Nigerians out of poverty in the next 10 years by creating opportunities that would improve the productivity of Nigerian youths for entrepreneurship or employment.
Going further the minister said, “Thus, the need to find ways to engage them is of utmost importance. However, the commencement of the enrolment of Batch C was predicated on the need to give more Nigerian youths the opportunity to benefit. This is because, keeping only 500,000 beneficiaries for four years defeats the purpose of Mr President’s vision, hence the need to scale up and was in no way meant to be punitive.”
While acknowledging the beneficiaries’ contributions, Farouq said, ‘’You are our model N-Power beneficiaries. Please avail yourselves of all opportunities provided by government like interest-free loans and leverage on those opportunities while using N-Power as a stepping stone”.
The minister said the ministry is working at resolving some of the challenges facing the programme which include delays in the payment of stipends, beneficiaries not showing up at their places of primary assignments and people accessing the programme while gainfully employed elsewhere.
The minister also assured beneficiaries that outstanding payments would be made and transition plans were ongoing and would be duly communicated to them on their platform.
Some of the beneficiaries of the programme gave good testimonies about the impact of the programme in their lives and all expressed their gratitude to the Federal Government for the opportunity.
Nairametrics has reported the opening of application portal for batch C of the programme with effect from 11.45 pm on June 26, 2020. There have been over 3 million applicants that have shown interest in batch C of the programme in about a week.
