KUALA LUMPUR (March 9): Share prices of Bursa Malaysia oil and gas (O&G)-related stocks, including Sapura Energy Bhd, Velesto Energy Bhd and Hibiscus Petroleum Bhd, fell in active morning trades today as world equities took cue from crude oil price's 30% drop to some US$30 a barrel after OPEC failed to strike a deal with its allies regarding production cuts amid the Covid-19 outbreak.
At 9:56am, Sapura Energy fell 4.5 sen to 11.5 sen, Velesto dropped 12.5 sen to 17.5 sen while Hibiscus was down 23.5 sen to 47.5 sen.
CNBC reported that oil prices plunged 30% in early trading today after OPEC’s failure to strike a deal with its allies regarding production cuts caused Saudi Arabia to slash its prices as it reportedly gets set to ramp up production, leading to fears of an all-out price war.
It was reported that international benchmark Brent crude futures plummeted 30% to US$31.02 per barrel, its lowest level since February 2016 while US West Texas Intermediate crude dropped 27% to US$30 per barrel, also its lowest level since February 2016.
The fall in O&G share prices has caught Bursa’s attention. Bursa said in separate special announcements today that proprietary day trading (PDT) short selling and intraday short selling (IDSS) for several stocks including Dayang Enterprise Holdings Bhd, Velesto and Hibiscus have been suspended for the rest of the day as the last done price of the approved securities dropped more than 15% or 15 sen from the reference price.
"The short selling under PDT and IDSS will only be activated the following trading day, Tuesday, March 10, 2020 at 08:30 am,” Bursa said.
Economists and analysts are mindful of the effects of lower crude oil prices on the global economy and O&G sector.
AmInvestment Bank Bhd analyst Alex Goh wrote in a note today that if Saudi Arabia restores its capacity of 12 million barrels/day, AmInvestment expects crude oil prices to easily crash below US$30/barrel.
As such, AmInvestment has lowered its 2020 crude oil price forecast to US$40–US$45/barrel and 2021 estimates to US$45–US$50/barrel from US$60–US$65/barrel given the rising excess oil capacity that is likely to flood global markets amid weak demand softened by the Covid-19 outbreak, Goh said.
"Oil price crash [is a] prelude to service sector curtailment,” he said.
He said AmInvestment has downgraded its Malaysian O&G sector call to underweight from overweight, "with revised calls to sell for Bumi Armada, Dialog Group, MISC, Sapura Energy, Serba Dinamik and Velesto”.
Among the O&G stocks, Goh said AmInvestment’s fair value (FV) for Velesto is reduced by 64% to 17 sen while the FV for Sapura Energy is cut by 62% to 13 sen.
OCBC Bank economist Howie Lee wrote in a note today that the Betrand economic model of competition suggests crude oil prices will fall to the lower cost of production. This level appears to be US$30 a barrel, which is the average cost of production in OPEC, according to Lee.
He said OCBC expects global deflation if oil prices stay at US$30 a barrel for an extended period of time.
"Oil prices play a crucial role in direct inflation inputs and have secondary effects in the cost of production in almost all goods and services.
"Oil at US$30/bbl is almost certain to push inflation in developed countries, which are already struggling with very low inflation rates, into negative territory. This will have an impact on monetary policy, as policy makers see the space and impetus to further loosen monetary policy as they try to keep prices from spiralling into an uncontrollable deflationary cycle,” he said.
