US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude climbed $1.32, or 3.4 per cent, to $40.16.
Brent crude was up $1.00, or 2.4 per cent, at $42.51 by 1332 GMT after hitting $42.89, its highest since June 8.
LONDON: Brent oil rose to above $42 a barrel on Friday, adding to gains in the previous session, after Opec producers and allies promised to meet supply cuts and on signs of demand, hit by the coronavirus crisis, recovering.
Iraq and Kazakhstan, during a meeting of an Opec+ panel on Thursday, pledged to comply better with oil cuts , sources said. This means curbs by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and allies, known as Opec+, could deepen in July.
"There is enthusiasm in the market that oil supply is still under control," said Paola Rodriguez Masiu, analyst at Rystad Energy. "A positive Opec+ meeting does that and yesterday's session helped renew confidence."
Brent crude was up $1.00, or 2.4 per cent, at $42.51 by 1332 GMT after hitting $42.89, its highest since June 8. US West Texas Intermediate ( WTI ) crude climbed $1.32, or 3.4 per cent, to $40.16.
"The key takeaway is that Opec+ compliance will improve in the coming months," said Stephen Brennock of broker PVM.
Both contracts rose about 2 per cent on Thursday and are heading for weekly gains of more than 9 per cent.
Brent has more than doubled since hitting a 21-year low in April, helped by record Opec+ supply cuts of 9.7 million barrels per day (bpd), or 10 per cent of world demand, and an easing of government lockdowns imposed to control the coronavirus.
Fuel demand in Europe is staging a gradual recovery after the height of the lockdowns in April but remains well below normal, data from several countries shows.
In a further sign of market recovery, Brent on Thursday moved into backwardation, where oil for immediate delivery costs more than supply later, for the first time since March. <LCOc1-LCOc2>
A premium for oil for immediate delivery usually indicates tightening supply and encourages storage to be drawn down.
US crude stocks hit another record this week, but fuel inventories fell.
(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news , stock tips and expert advice on ETMarkets . Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)
Commenting feature is disabled in your country/region.
Why follow tips? Choose your winners rationally in 3 simple steps!
To see your saved stories, click on link hightlighted in bold
We use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your browsing experience on our site, show personalize 
                    content and targeted ads, analyze site traffic, and understand where our audience is coming from. You can also read our privacy policy , We use cookies to ensure the best
                    experience for you on our website.
These cookies are used to collect information about traffic to our Services and how users use our Services. The information gathered does not identify any individual visitor. The information is aggregated and therefore anonymous. It includes the number of visitors to our Services, the websites that referred them to our Services, the pages that they visited on our Services, what time of day they visited our Services, whether they have visited our Services before, and other similar information. We use this information to help operate our Services more efficiently, to gather broad demographic information and to monitor the level of activity on our Services. We use Google Analytics for this purpose. Google Analytics uses its own cookies. It is only used to improve how our Services works. You can find out more information about Google Analytics cookies here: https://developers.google.com/analytics/resources/concepts/gaConceptsCookies . You can find out more about how Google protects your data here: www.google.com/analytics/learn/privacy.html .
These cookies track your browsing habits to enable us to show advertising which is more likely to be of interest to you. These cookies use information about your browsing history to group you with other users who have similar interests. Based on that information, and with our permission, third-party advertisers can place cookies to enable them to show adverts which we think will be relevant to your interests while you are on third-party websites. These cookies also store your location, including your latitude, longitude, and GeoIP region ID, which helps us show you locale-specific news and allows our Services to operate more efficiently. If you choose to remove targeted or advertising cookies, you will still see adverts but they may not be relevant to you.
