Despite avoiding oil price crash, Nigeria is still in trouble
Despite the crude oil price crash and the volatility of the oil market, the prices of Nigeria’s flagship crude oil products remained quite stable yesterday.
It was widely reported that the US headline crude, WTI, in a historic turn of event, crashed below $0 yesterday Monday, April 20, 2020, for the first time ever, sending shock waves across the world.
The report from the futures market discloses that they all remained above the $20 mark, with Bonny light selling for $20.88 per barrel, Brass River selling for $22.75 per barrel, and Qua Iboe going for $22.75 per barrel. This is despite the crash into negative territory by WTI and the plunge by Brent crude.
READ MORE: US headline crude oil crashes further, below $0 in an unprecedented outcome
However, this still does not relieve Nigeria of its revenue pressure and foreign exchange earnings, as these prices fall far below the revised budget benchmark of $30 per barrel.
In the preparation of its annual budget, Nigeria usually benchmarks its budget against the Brent crude, which fell to $21.37 per barrel, well below the $30 per barrel revised price.
The country still has a lot of unsold cargoes as demand remains very low. In fact, Nigerian crude was sold at a discounted price of $12 per barrel a few days ago due to decline in interest by buyers to purchase crude cargoes, accumulated inventory and low oil demand due to lockdown and restrictions of businesses and households because of covid-19.
READ MORE: Nigeria’s trade balance hits recession low, records N579 billion deficit in Q4 2019
Nigeria’s crude oil export was also cut by 400,000 barrels per day following the deal by OPEC+ and other oil-producing countries in a bid to stabilize the market.
The dangerous exposure of Nigeria to the crude oil price crash and low demand globally will be a huge blow to the country’s ability to meet its revenue target for the revised budget, lead to more pressure and instability in the country’s foreign exchange market, have a negative effect to different upstream projects in the country.
Chike Olisah is a graduate of accountancy with over 15 years working experience in the financial service sector. He has worked in research and marketing departments of three top commercial banks. Chike is a senior member of the Nairametrics Editorial Team.
You may contact him via his email- chike.olisah@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
Nairametrics gathered that the arrest happened on Monday afternoon.
The Third Mainland Bridge is the longest of three bridges connecting Lagos Island to the mainland.
The Federal Government has announced plans to shut down the Third Mainland Bridge for maintenance work from July 24, 2020.
This was disclosed by the Federal Controller of Works in Lagos, Mr Olukayode Popoola, during an interaction with the News Agency of Nigeria (NAN) on Monday July 6, 2020.
In the conversation, Popoola said that consultations were on for another phase of repair works to commence on the Third Mainland Bridge. He told the News Agency of Nigeria that the consultations were towards developing a perfect traffic management architecture that will be very efficient and effective.
According to Popoola, “We want to do maintenance work on Third Mainland Bridge very soon. Most likely on the 24th. We may close it from 24th of July.’’
“We are still working out the modalities and when we perfect the traffic management plan we will move to site. Everything being expected for the repairs of the bridge arrived the country that is why we want to start the repairs now,’’
The 11.8km bridge which has gone through series of rehabilitation works was last closed for repairs in August 2018 for 3 days of investigative maintenance check.
Thereafter, some components needed for completion of repairs were sourced abroad because they were not available locally.
There has been reports of some worn-out joints of the bridge, which has raised some serious safety concerns for the users of the bridge. The federal government will be working with the Lagos State Traffic Management Agency (LASTMA) on how best traffic during this period.
The Third Mainland Bridge is the longest of three bridges connecting Lagos Island to the mainland.
The bridge starts from Oworonshoki which is linked to the Apapa-Oshodi Expressway and the Lagos-Ibadan Expressway and ends at the Adeniji Adele Interchange on Lagos Island.
It was opened for use 1990 and was the longest in Africa until 1996 when The 6th October Bridge in Cairo was completed.
The Big Four firms now reportedly generate the largest portions of their revenues from consultancy services.
The world’s four biggest audit firms —KPMG, PwC, Ernest & Young, and Deloitte — have been directed by the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) to plan towards separating their audit services from their consulting services.
The deadline for compliance with this directive is June 2024.
A statement that was published on the FRC website said this directive is ‘world-leading’. The statement also explained why it became imperative to separate the firms’ operations towards ensuring that they deliver the uttermost quality audit services for the good of public interest.
By the time the operational separation officially takes effect starting from June 2024, FRC said it would be expecting the following outcomes :
That audit practice governance would prioritise audit quality and protect auditors from influences from the rest of the firm that may try to divert their focus away from audit quality.
That the total amount of profits distributed to the partners in the audit practice does not persistently exceed the contribution to profits of the audit practice.
The culture of the audit practice prioritises high-quality audit by encouraging ethical behaviour, openness, teamwork, challenge and professional scepticism/judgement.
Auditors act in the public interest and work for the benefit of shareholders of audited entities and wider society.
While commenting on this development, FRC’s Chief Executive Officer, Sir Jon Thompson, said the FRC is committed to reforms on how corporate finances are reported. Further aspects of the reform package will be introduced over time, he said.
“Operational separation of audit practices is one element of the FRC’s strategy to improve the quality and effectiveness of corporate reporting and audit in the United Kingdom following the Kingman, CMA and Brydon reviews. Today the FRC has delivered a major step in the reform of the audit sector by setting principles for operational separation of audit practices from the rest of the firm. The FRC remains fully committed to the broad suite of reform measures on corporate reporting and audit reform and will introduce further aspects of the reform package over time,” Thompson stated.
Do note that the FRC reached this decision after engaging in extensive discussions with the Big Four. It was also agreed that the audit firms will submit an implementation plan to the FRC latest by October 23rd, 2020.
Recall that it was just last week when Nairametrics reported how the Big Four earned the sum of N7.53 billion as audit fees from Nigeria’s most capitalized firms in 2019. Interestingly, these firms now reportedly generate the largest portions of their revenues from consultancy services. As a matter of fact, only about 20% of their revenues now come from auditing fees.
