For many market participants, it feels good to see shares, including oil stocks, going in a positive direction. Oil prices have moved far beyond the negative prices that we have saw a few months ago. The price of Brent crude, the internationally accepted benchmark, is now around $41. And this recent move up in oil prices has brought the decimated oil sector up with it.
What might be next for oil major BP (LSE: BP) shares, especially if there is yet another FTSE market crash this year?
Is another FTSE market crash coming?
Since late March, the FTSE 100 index is up over 25%. Put another way, if you were brave enough to invest £1,000 in the index in early April, you’d now have over £1,250.
Understandably market participants are nervous about what may happen to their portfolios if the FTSE crashes again in the coming months. After all, in early 2020, Britons witnessed one of the steepest market drops in recent history.
So far in the year, we’ve seen a bear market, the Covid-19 pandemic, an oil price war, record-low interest rates , and even a bull market. If history is any guide, extreme declines and spikes in shares are likely to happen in the future too. However, investors may do due diligence on a wide range of stocks to see which ones may be more appropriate for their portfolios.
Fortunately, Foolish investors don’t need to worry about short-term volatility. We know how important it is to buy solid companies and hold for the long term.
Are oil stocks like BP cheap enough to buy now?
Year-to-date, the BP share price is down about 33% and hovering at 320p. Yet that metric tells only half the story. Since the lows seen in March, BP shares are up over 35%. Hence if you were brave enough to invest £1,000 in the company then, you’d now have over £1,350.
According to a recent trading update, management now expects “on-cash impairment charges and write-offs in the second quarter, estimated to be in an aggregate range of $13 billion to $17.5 billion post-tax“. This is a big write-down. In fact it is the biggest write-off since the Macondo oil spill of 2010.
I believe it would be important to see the next quarterly results before making a long-term investment case in BP stock. The decrease in global energy demand will likely hurt the company’s upstream and downstream business further in Q2.
Over the years, dividend-paying shares, like BP stock, have been darlings especially among passive income seeking investors. BP is still paying a quarterly dividend and thanks to the sagging stock price, the current yield is 10.6%.
Yet, how long can this dividend yield last when so many other companies have been cutting theirs? Indeed, the trading update of mid-June may be taken as a potential warning that the drop in profitability may hurt the dividends.
If the company were also to decrease the dividend, the BP stock price would likely come under pressure. I’m too of the camp that a dividend cut is a matter of ‘when not if’ and I expect the announcement to be made with the Q2 results.
Long-term market participants may want to consider buying BP stock around 300p.
5G is here – and shares of this ‘sleeping giant’ could be a great way for you to potentially profit!
According to one leading industry firm, the 5G boom could create a global industry worth US $12.3 TRILLION out of thin air…
And if you click here , we’ll show you something that could be key to unlocking 5G’s full potential...
Click here to learn more.
tezcang has no position in any of the shares mentioned. The Motley Fool UK has no position in any of the shares mentioned. Views expressed on the companies mentioned in this article are those of the writer and therefore may differ from the official recommendations we make in our subscription services such as Share Advisor, Hidden Winners and Pro. Here at The Motley Fool we believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors.
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
Savvy investors like you won’t want to miss out on this opportunity… Here’s your chance to discover exactly what has got our Motley Fool UK analyst all revved up about this ‘pure-play’ online business (yes, despite the COVID pandemic!). To get the full research report for FREE, simply enter your email address below
I would like to receive emails from you about product information and offers from The Fool and its business partners. Each of these emails will provide a link to unsubscribe from future emails. More information about how The Fool collects, stores, and handles personal data is available in its Privacy Statement.
To help you make the best choice possible, The Motley Fool's MyWalletHero has reviewed and ranked some of the UK's top share dealing brokers. Check out our top picks for the best share dealing brokers .
Trade UK shares for just £2.95 and US shares for just $3.95 — with no platform fee!
The FinecoBank* Multi-Currency Trading Account offers UK investors highly competitive share-dealing rates across 26 global markets.
Use promo code FINECO-MF today and enjoy up to 50 free trades over your first two months!
Important information and risk disclaimer: The value of shares and any income produced can fall as well as rise, and you may get back less than you invest. Exchange rate fluctuations can reduce the sterling value of any overseas holdings.
© 1998 – 2020 The Motley Fool. All rights reserved. The Motley Fool, Fool, and the Fool logo are registered trademarks of The Motley Fool Holdings Inc.
MyWalletHero, Fool and The Motley Fool are all trading names of The Motley Fool Ltd. The Motley Fool Ltd is an appointed representative of Richdale Brokers & Financial Services Ltd who are authorised and regulated by the FCA (FRN: 422737). In this capacity we are permitted to act as a credit-broker, not a lender, for consumer credit products. We may also publish information about consumer credit, loan, mortgage, insurance, savings and investment products and services, including those of our affiliate partners. We do not provide personal advice neither will we arrange any product on your behalf. Should you require advice you should speak to a qualified financial adviser.
Registered in England & Wales. Company No: 3736872. VAT Number: 188035783.
This site uses cookies, pixels, and other similar technologies to improve your web site experience and to deliver you personalised ads about our own and third party products and services. Please read more about how we collect and use data about you in this way in our Cookies Statement in our Privacy Policy . You can change your cookie settings in your browser at any time.
I would like content tailored to my personal preferences.
We work with advertising partners to show you ads of products and services you may be interested in. You can choose whether or not to have ads delivered in a personalised way by setting this option. You can return to review this setting at any time by clicking the "C" logo in the bottom left corner of any page.
