The FTSE 100 and US stock markets rose sharply today as investors cheered the prospect of more stimulus for the UK economy and followed the lead of Asian markets.
London’s index of blue-chip companies was 1.6 per cent higher this afternoon at 6,258 points. The FTSE 250 index of slightly smaller firms rose 1.2 per cent.
Wall Street opened well in the green, with the S&P 500 up 1.4 per cent shortly after the bell. The Dow Jones was also 1.4 per cent higher and the Nasdaq was up 1.6 per cent, taking it to a record intraday high.
In Europe, Germany’s Dax was 1.5 per cent higher. France’s CAC 40 was up 1.4 per cent and the continent-wide Stoxx 600 had risen 1.2 per cent.
The rise on the FTSE 100 was led by housebuilders after reports said stamp duty could be slashed.
Market optimism was also boosted by a surge in China’s CSI 300 index. It jumped 5.7 per cent overnight as the state media sang the economy’s praises and investors reacted to positive recent data.
Global stock markets are now around 20 to 40 per cent above the March nadir. They have continued to rise as economies have reopened, supported by huge stimulus measures from the world’s central banks.
Chancellor Rishi Sunak is set to announce plans this week to lift the threshold at which home-buyers start paying tax duty to as high as £500,000 from £125,000, according to The Times.
Barratt soared 7.4 per cent as the reports combined with an upbeat trading statement. Persimmon jumped 4.6 per cent while Taylor Wimpey was close behind with a 4.3 per cent rise.
Bullish investors were further bolstered by survey data that showed the construction sector rebounded sharply in June.
“While the resumption of operations at Barratt certainly provided a boost, news of a healthy order book has boosted sentiment for a potential strong rebound in the second half,” said Josh Mahony, senior market analyst at trading platform IG.
FTSE 100 investors will also have taken note of the scenes across the country on Saturday. Pubs, restaurants and cafes were allowed to reopen for business.
Chinese shares rocketed overnight as state media talked up the economy and investors reacted to positive data. China’s CSI 300 index soared 5.7 per cent. It was the biggest one-day rise in over a year.
Other Asian markets rose too. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng climbed 3.8 per cent, putting it in a technical bull market – a 20 per cent rise. Japan’s Nikkei finished up 1.8 per cent.
The rally was in large part driven by a bullish front-page editorial in the state-run Chinese Securities Journal.
“Investors certainly look like they believe China, the world’s second biggest economy, will lead a global recovery,” said Fawad Razaqzada, market analyst at trading platform Think Markets.
Saxo Bank chief economist Steen Jakobsen said: “Retail investors dominating the Chinese equity market are buying the story about the prospects for a healthy bull market.”
The march of global stock markets continues despite the number of coronavirus cases surging in the US. States such as Florida and Texas have stepped back from plans to reopen, in moves likely to damage their economies.
The pound was 0.3 per cent higher against the dollar as the FTSE 100 rose at $1.252.
The euro was up 0.8 per cent against the dollar at $1.134. It came as investors moved out of the greenback, a safe-haven asset, in favour of stocks.
