Both gold and oil are rising, although with US markets closed for the day it is likely to be a quiet end to the week.
Chris Beauchamp | Chief Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-07-03T09:32:09+0100
This uptrend shows no sign of slowing for gold , although for now the price is drifting lower from $1780.
Further gains target $1790, and we would need to see a reversal below $1760 at least to suggest that a more near-term bearish view has emerged.
The uptrend from the mid-June low is still in place for Brent crude , although the price has yet to recover the peak from 23 June at $44.
Higher lows and higher highs over the past two weeks reinforce the bullish view, with a more bearish outlook requiring a drop below $41 and then below $40.
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer and quarterly summary .
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
1In the case of all DFBs, there is a fixed expiry at some point in the future.
See opportunity on a commodity?
Don’t miss your chance. Try a risk-free trade in your demo account, and find out whether your hunch could have paid off.
