Gold starts to turn higher from Fibonacci support, as Brent crude heads lower off the back of a big API inventories build.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-05-28T10:17:28+0100
Gold has started to move higher following a decline into the 76.4% Fibonacci support level at $1693. The confluence between that Fibonacci support level and the 11 May low of $1692 provides us with a very important level of note, which has currently provided a basis for the price of gold potentially bottoming out.
The use of the standard deviation channel points towards a resistance level of note up ahead. As such, while we could bottom following the decline into the 76.4% Fibonacci support level, a break through channel and $1735 resistance would provide greater confidence that we are on our way back towards the $1765 highs.
Brent has started to turn south following a surprise build in American Petroleum Institute (API) crude inventories yesterday. That highlights the ongoing oversupply despite recent cuts to production around the world.
For Brent, the subsequent decline is taking us back towards the key $33.85 support level. A break below the point would bring about a double top formation. However, there is a good chance we will continue this recent consolidation, with a rise from here. Watch for a break through the 20 threshold on the stochastic to build greater confidence that momentum is reversing higher. Until then, the outlook will be determine by whether we break $33.85 support or not. Keep an eye out for the US Energy Information Administration (EIA) crude inventories number as a driver of sentiment going forward.
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Trade commodity futures, as well as 27 commodity markets with no fixed expiries.
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
