Gold and Brent crude look set for another move higher, with recent gains resolving in a retracement phase.
Joshua Mahony | Senior Market Analyst, London | Publication date : 2020-06-30T11:02:10+0100
Gold has been largely sideways since Friday’s push through $1769 resistance, with the precious metal seemingly rangebound thus far this week.
Given the rally into this current holding pattern, there is a good chance we push higher from here. That would play into the wider bullish trend that has been playing out over the past 22 months for gold. To the upside, it is worthwhile watching for a break through the $1774-$1775 zone as a bullish breakout signal. Until that happens, further consolidation looks likely.
Brent managed to break through the $41.79 resistance level yesterday, bringing a potential sign of impending strength for energy markets. This comes after a decline back into trendline support, which has provided a reliable source of upside over the past week.
With the price turning lower this morning, there is a good chance we are looking at a retracement before the market turns higher once more. A break below the $40.01-$39.68 support zone would be required to negate this bullish outlook.
The information on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG Bank S.A. accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients. See full non-independent research disclaimer .
Trade commodity futures, as well as 27 commodity markets with no fixed expiries.
Wide range of popular and niche metals, energies and softs
Spreads from 0.3 pts on Spot Gold, 2 pts on Spot Silver and 2.8 pts on Oil
