Oil prices rose as markets worried about U.S. and Iran tensions.
Fast-moving developments in the Middle East sent oil prices higher again on Monday, making it clear that the U.S. killing of Iranian military commander Qassem Soleimani is likely to affect prices for an extended period. Analysts, however, have mixed opinions about whether the rise could last.
Brent crude futures briefly rose above $70 on Monday morning, before giving back some of those gains. After 11 a.m. ET, Brent was trading up 0.2% to $68.85. West Texas Intermediate crude oil futures, the U.S. benchmark, have gained 0.2% to $63.19 a barrel. Oil is likely to trade on headlines in the near term, with a new “floor” for West Texas crude of $55 and short-term spikes over $70, according to SunTrust Investment Advisory Group. Longer-dated crude futures indicate, however, that traders see prices falling again. Brent futures dated a year from now are trading around $62.
At least a quarter of the 100 million barrels or so of global oil production is likely vulnerable to disruption. The two biggest producers in the region—Saudi Arabia and Iraq—pump about 15 million barrels a day of oil. But much more crude moves through the region. More than 20% of oil supplies flow through the Strait of Hormuz, a key passageway right next to Iran. If the strait was shut down—an unlikely scenario—oil prices could spike by $20 a barrel, according to Edward Moya, an analyst at currency broker OANDA. Attacks in and around the strait have disrupted oil supplies multiple times in the past year. Iranian oil production has already been stymied by U.S. sanctions, falling to about 2 million barrels a day from 4 million a year ago. Before the attacks, most analysts had expected supply to outpace demand in 2020, but the new risks make it more likely the market will be balanced in the near term.
Iran has vowed to strike back at U.S. assets, which could include oil fields. The State Department warned oil workers based in Saudi Arabia that they could be targets of attacks, and some companies have pulled their workers out of the region. Some analysts see U.S. producers and service companies being the largest beneficiaries. They are more price-sensitive than some Middle Eastern producers like Saudi Aramco (ticker: 2222.SA), and are more insulated from violence.
“We view the U.S. market to be the best way to take advantage of Middle East geopolitical events with Halliburton (HAL) being our preferred stock,” wrote Deutsche Bank analyst Chris Snyder.
Other analysts, however, warn investors not to count on high oil prices for long. The outlook is “not yet bullish,” wrote Wells Fargo analyst Roger Read. He expects Brent to trade at $55 this year, and West Texas crude to trade at $53.75.
“In a world of expected modest annual demand growth (i.e., range of 1.0-1.5%), continued growth from shales and meaningful OPEC ‘turn on the tap’ supply, we do not see a convincing path to sustainably higher oil prices into 2022 at least,” he wrote. OPEC may decide to curb production, but “we believe we are fully in the grips of an energy ‘down-cycle’ and that productivity and efficiency gains will weigh upon any commodity price upside well into the 2020s.”
Iran Worries Are Causing Oil Prices to Rise Again. The Gains May Not Last.
Fast-moving developments in the Middle East sent oil prices higher again on Monday, making it clear that the U.
