Offshore oil projects tend to last longer than those on land.
Noble Corp. , an offshore oil driller, withdrew its 2020 financial forecasts on Thursday, citing the unpredictable global oil markets, the latest sign that the business has been thrown into turmoil by the downturn in crude prices. Despite some signs of hope as a few large projects move forward, most stocks are still not a Buy at current levels.
Amid a larger downturn that has cut about half the value from the average energy stock, offshore oil drillers are in a particularly tough spot. They never really recovered from the oil-price downturn that started in 2014; daily drilling rates have stayed low since then, showing no signs of rebounding.
Advanced drillships that fetched more than $500,000 per day in 2013 now get less than half that much. With Brent crude, the international benchmark, trading for less than $35, the rates on new contracts are likely to continue to fall.
Too many drilling companies carried heavy debt loads into the crisis. The stocks are in free fall. Both the British company Valaris (VAL) and Houston-based Nabors Industries (NBR) are down about 90% since the start of the year. Noble (NE) is down 75%.
At the same time, some offshore projects remain viable and are arguably better positioned than onshore drilling right now. Offshore projects tend to last for much longer than onshore wells, whose output diminishes relatively quickly.
To drill offshore, companies have to make multiyear commitments. Land drilling can be halted and begun much more easily.
Exxon Mobil (XOM), for instance, announced major cuts to its drilling in the Permian Basin , the most productive U.S. oil field, this week. But it continues full steam ahead with its most important offshore work—a project off the coast of Guyana in South America that could last nearly a decade and produce eight billion barrels of oil.
One of the companies working with Exxon and Hess (HES) on that project is Transocean (RIG). The project is an important bulwark for Transocean, but it’s unlikely to generate warm feelings on Wall Street, which sees little hope for a rebound in the shares.
Transocean’s debt levels are still a red flag for many investors, and there is no clear path to a major rebound in its rates. Before the 2014 oil-price downturn, the company was worth more than $15 billion. It now trades for less than $1 billion, and its adjusted operating earnings didn’t cover its interest expenses as of the end of last year, according to FactSet.
“In a $70 world we thought Transocean, Valaris, Vallourec and Nabors needed new equity,” wrote Bernstein analyst Nicholas Green in a recent note, referring to the price of a barrel of oil, which currently sells for about $23. (Vallourec is a manufacturing company, but the other three drill offshore).
“They now face an existential challenge to persuade both debt and equity funding to support them. We fear the equity may be worth zero, and would not want to take the risk of recovery on these names. We recommend remaining shareholders exit now.”
That doesn’t mean all companies operating offshore are Sells right now. Those with stronger balance sheets look attractive , according to Green.
That includes Subsea 7, a British engineering and construction firm that works on offshore projects. Subsea 7’s adjusted operating earnings covered its interest expense nearly five times over last year, according to FactSet. The stock was 61% undervalued as of this week, he estimated.
He also likes SBM Offshore, a Dutch company that supplies equipment and services to offshore projects. That stock is 22% undervalued, according to Green.
Most Offshore Oil Stocks Are Hurting. These 2 Look Like Buys.
