Oil futures ended sharply lower on Monday, with prices logging their lowest settlement in more than a year and marking their entry into a bear market, as worries about a slowdown in oil demand persist on the back of the coronavirus outbreak.
The Wall Street Journal reported that in response to the demand concerns tied to coronavirus, Saudi Arabia is pushing OPEC and its allies for a major, short-term cut in crude production, but that news has failed to provide support to prices.
An adjustment in output from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies “is to be expected with at least a 3 million [barrel a day] drop in consumption,” said James Williams, energy economist at WTRG Economics. “The big OPEC question is will they wait until their early March meeting for a decision.”
West Texas Intermediate crude for March delivery US:CLH20 lost $1.45, or 2.8%, to settle at $50.11 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange after trading as low as $49.91. Prices for the front-month contract saw its lowest finish since January 2019.
The settlement marked WTI’s entry into a bear market , down 20.8% from its recent high of $63.27 on Jan. 6, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
April Brent crude UK:BRNJ20 fell $2.17, or 3.8%, to end at $54.45 a barrel on ICE Futures Europe, for its lowest settlement since Dec. 31, 2018. The settlement level also marked the global benchmark’s entry into a bear market, down 21% from its recent high of $69.02 from Sept. 16.
The Journal , citing officials from OPEC, said the Saudis, under one scenario, would lead a collective reduction of 500,000 barrels a day that would stand until the viral outbreak subsided. Another option would be a temporary cut of 1 million barrels a day by Saudi Arabia to provide the oil market with a jolt, the report said.
OPEC and its allies are set to hold a technical meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday to discuss possible action, the report said. The OPEC website still lists the next gatherings as March 5 for the special meeting of the OPEC Conference and March 6 for the OPEC+ meeting.
“Oil prices will likely remain near the low $50s until we see further signs that China will see some return to normalcy with oil consumption. Any extended cuts delivered by OPEC+ will likely deliver rallies that will get sold into,” said Edward Moya, senior market analyst at Oanda, in a note. “Oil prices will remain heavy until we see start to see some signs that the virus may be peaking.”
Also see: Oil sector leads commodities lower in January, but gold shines are coronavirus shakes up the market
Bloomberg reported Sunday , citing people with inside knowledge of China’s energy industry, that Chinese oil demand has dropped by roughly 3 million barrels a day, or 20% of total consumption due to the virus’ impact on the national’s economy.
China’s National Health Commission on Sunday said cases of the new virus reached 17,205, while the death toll hit 361. Cases have also been reported outside the country, with the World Health Organization last week declaring a public health emergency of international concern.
U.S. benchmark stock indexes traded broadly higher Monday after a Friday rout that saw the Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA,
