Oil prices climbed Thursday on signs that the global economy is moving towards a slow reopening, and inventory data shows storage demand for the commodity rising slower than expected.
West Texas Intermediate crude climbed as much as 20%, to $18 per barrel. Meanwhile, international benchmark Brent crude rose 14%, to $25.75 per barrel, at intraday highs.
Many large economies are moving to lift the most stringent of coronavirus lockdown measures , which should boost demand for oil.
Growth of demand for oil storage is also slowing. A report from the US Energy Information Administration Wednesday showed inventories of oil rising by nine million barrels last week, significantly lower than the 10.6 million barrel increase forecast by analysts.
Oil prices ignored a forecast by the the International Energy Agency, which said: "Energy demand will fall 6% in 2020 — seven times the decline after the 2008 global financial crisis."
Track US oil prices live on Markets Insider.
Oil prices surged on Thursday on signs that the global economy is moving towards a slow reopening. Inventory data also showed storage demand for the commodity rising slower than expected.
West Texas Intermediate crude climbed as much as 20%, to $18 per barrel. Meanwhile, international benchmark Brent crude rose 14%, to $25.75 per barrel, at intraday highs.
Many large economies are moving to lift the most stringent of coronavirus lockdown measures . Several US states are taking measures such as reopening non-essential stores , while some European countries are taking similar steps. This reopening has boosted sentiment, creating expectations that oil demand will likely increase in coming weeks.
Prices also rallied on signs that demand for storage of oil is coming off recent highs. A report from the US Energy Information Administration Wednesday showed inventories of oil rising by nine million barrels last week, significantly lower than the 10.6 million barrel increase forecast by analysts.
Neil Wilson, market analyst at Markets.com, said: "Oil continues to notch gains as the risk rally reflects hopes of the global economy opening up sooner, and after a smaller-than-feared build in US crude inventories."
Oil prices have experienced swings of both downward and upward volatility over the last month. US oil prices turned negative for the first time in history last week, while Brent dropped to a more than two-decade low.
The positive movement in oil prices comes despite a gloomy forecast by the International Energy Agency on Thursday that predicted global energy demand will slump seven times more than it did during the 2008 global financial crisis.
Dr Fatih Birol, executive director of the IEA said: "It is still too early to determine the longer-term impacts, but the energy industry that emerges from this crisis will be significantly different from the one that came before."
Read more: A fund manager who's beating the market by betting on tiny companies says coronavirus 'turbocharged' the trends driving his portfolio. He told us what they are, and the 3 stocks he's most bullish on.
"This will continue until we reach the equilibrium of supply equating demand, given storage and filling capacity constraints – as with nowhere to store the oil, supply has no other option but to be shut-in in-line with the expected demand losses."
But MUFG predicts at this this inflection point that demand-supply fundamentals will balance and oil prices will bottom out.
