US benchmark WTI prices traded in the negative territory for the first time on April 20 with May future contracts for WTI oil crashing to historic low of -$37.6 per barrel, ahead of expiry day
New Delhi : The latest crash of the global oil prices is likely to significantly hurt Indian upstream oil companies, petrochemical business and firms like GAIL (India) as oversupply is likely to continue to be an overhang, according to equity research firm ICICI Securities .
"ONGC’s profitability will be affected if oil prices remain at lower levels. We estimate oil prices at $37.5 per barrel for FY21E with profit at Rs 3,777.6 crore. If prices remain at $20 per barrel for FY21E, ONGC will report losses at Rs 6,596.7 crore," the firm said in a report.
US benchmark WTI prices traded in the negative territory for the first time on April 20 with May future contracts for WTI oil crashing to historic low of -$37.6 per barrel, ahead of expiry day. Due to the Covid-19 outbreak, oil consumption has declined drastically, which led storage capacities in the US to get almost full. As WTI contracts get settled physically on expiry, there was a historic collapse in oil prices.
Currently, WTI June oil prices are trading at around $12.7 per barrel while July oil prices are trading at $20.4 per barrel. In case of India, Brent oil prices are more relevant and they are trading at $18.6 per barrel for June and $23.2 per barrel for July.
From the beginning of 2020, Brent oil prices have declined 60 per cent while WTI oil prices went below zero. In March, a disagreement between Opec and Russia regarding production cut led to a price war in the global market. This led Brent to drop to $30 per barrel. In April, finally Opec+ announced a deal to reduce oil output by 9.7 million barrels per day (mbpd).
As per the International Energy Agency (IEA), global oil demand could drop by 23 million barrel per day in Q1FY21E amid spread of Covid-19, which meant that even if a 9.7 mbpd output cut takes place in May, there will still be oversupply of oil in the international market. Hence, the new Opec deal also failed to boost prices as the proposed output cut was not sufficient.
With demand declining to 77 mbpd and global oil supply at 90 mbpd with current arrangements, oil surplus is expected to remain in the global market in Q1FY21E even if the US oil output reduces in May. With regard to oil prices in the short-term, global oil storage will be a key determinant till Covid-19 crisis gets over.
