Oil prices hit the biggest daily decline on COVID-19 resurgence, inventories
This year has been a turbulent one for the oil market as crude oil prices went negative for the first time in history.
This year has been a turbulent one for the oil market as crude oil prices went negative for the first time in history. This was closely followed by one of the most dramatic rallies the industry has ever seen as the oil market stabilizes.
However, a resurgence of COVID-19 cases in the United States which is compounded by another record build up in US oil inventories and a gloomy economic forecast from the Federal Reserve Chairman, Jerome Powell has seen the oil prices hit their biggest daily decline since April 27. The lack of demand and supply glut has once again taken centre stage.
The Brent crude lost over 8% to sell at about $38 per barrel and the American WTI lost declined by about 9% to sell at about $36 per barrel.
According to Energy Information Administration (EIA), the US oil inventories unexpectedly rose by 5.7 million barrels of crude oil to 538.1 million barrels, which is contrary to the earlier predictions of 1.45 million barrel build-up. This is due to the arrival of supplies that were bought by refiners when Saudi Arabia flooded the market in March and April.
Read Also: Why are oil prices down despite a successful OPEC meeting?
The high inventory, together with the recent announcement of an unemployment rate of almost 9.3% by the end of 2020 by the US federal reserve, has put more pressure on the oil market. It is predicted that it could take years to get back to pre-pandemic employment levels. The US federal reserve had also projected that the world’s biggest economy will shrink by 6.5% this year.
The resurgence of the coronavirus pandemic has been the main cause of the oil market collapse. It took almost 3 months to hit I million confirmed cases, whereas it took only 6 weeks to hit 2 million mark with many states reporting significant spikes.
Analysts have said that the prices have come under pressure again over concerns about the slow pace of the demand recovery.
Chike Olisah is a graduate of accountancy with over 15 years working experience in the financial service sector. He has worked in research and marketing departments of three top commercial banks. Chike is a senior member of the Nairametrics Editorial Team.
You may contact him via his email- chike.olisah@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
Nigerian LNG to increase exports, returns profits despite weak gas prices
The gas firm has been able to sell the excess supply at a discount in the spot market.
Nigeria will most likely increase the export of its Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) in August and September to the global market if the demand of the commodity goes up despite the crash in prices which is near record lows.
However, in the meantime, the government-owned Nigeria Liquefied Natural Gas (NLNG) company has concluded plans to maintain its current supply level to the global market. This is contrary to what some other exporters like the United States and Australia seem to be doing following low prices.
According to a report from Bloomberg, Nigeria exported over 1.8 million tons in the month of June, which is more than last year’s monthly average of 1.7 million tons.
Some of the country’s buyers have effected clauses in their long-term which allows them to take fewer shipments than was originally agreed. The gas firm has been able to sell the excess supply at a discount in the spot market. Over 50% of Nigeria’s exports in May were sold in Asia as against the about 30% that was sold last year.
Natural gas exports have slowed in June as the coronavirus pandemic has negatively affected global demand. Most of the multibillion-dollar projects in natural gas export terminals have been either halted or delayed as a result of the disruptions by the pandemic.
The damage to the gas trade goes well beyond the Middle East as it is affecting similar businesses in Australia, which is reputed to be the world’s largest exporter of LNG and the United States. With the global exports down by 6.3% from the previous year, only a few exporting countries like Qatar and Algeria, have been able to increase output.
The positive for Nigeria is that the production cost at its LNG facility in Bonny island is so low that it can still turn a profit despite the weak spot prices. The facility has been about the lowest costs when compared to similar projects around the world.
Nairametrics had reported that the NLNG just signed the engineering, procurement and construction contract for its train 7 project, which is a major gas expansion plan. The project is expected to boost the country’s LNG output by more than 30%.
The NLNG is a consortium between the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC), Royal Dutch Shell, Total and Eni. The project is coming at a difficult time when LNG prices in Asia and gas prices in Europe have hit a record low due to the coronavirus pandemic which has weakened demand.
