Australian-listed oil and gas producer Oil Search will raise $1.1 billion through a share sale in the hope of weathering a "prolonged period" of weak oil prices and turmoil engulfing energy markets.
An all-out price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia, which is unleashing greater oil supply onto a market already suffering from falling demand due to coronavirus, has sent the price of crude oil crashing toward 20-year lows and inflicted enormous pain onto oil and gas companies in Australia and worldwide.
Australian-listed Oil Search operates oil fields in PNG.
Oil Search, whose stock price has plunged 40 per cent since the crisis began, has been the worst-hit Australian producer. The company told investors on Tuesday new shares would be offered at $2.10, a 23 per cent discount to the last trading price of $2.73, using the proceeds to strengthen its balance sheet and increase liquidity.
Managing director Keiran Wulff said Oil Search was taking a range of measures to protect its value including deep cutbacks of nearly 40 per cent of its investment spending, cuts to staff and salaries, and extending a $US300 million loan by nine months to June 2021.
The company's "capital preservation measures", along with the equity raising, were intended to ensure it could withstand prolonged price pain, he said.
"Oil Search believes it is well positioned to deliver on its world-class growth projects in PNG and Alaska when market conditions improve," Mr Wulff said.
Oil Search's largest shareholder, the Abu Dhabi-based investment fund Mubadala, said it would not participate in the equity raising.
Coinciding with a steep collapse in oil demand amid coronavirus travel restrictions, the price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia has driven the sharpest falls in oil prices since the Gulf War in 1991. The benchmark Brent crude and West Texas Intermediate prices have plummeted below $US30 a barrel since March, triggering a sell-off from oil and gas stocks and warnings of project delays and cost-cutting across the industry.
Oil Search slashed its expected investment spending by $675 million, suspending all non-essential projects and activities in Papua New Guinea and deferring exploration work it had planned. In Alaska, works to begin early oil production at its Pikka project were put on hold and the company suspended formal talks to sell off a 15 per cent stake in its Alaskan assets.
Analysts said Australian oil and gas producers including Oil Search, Woodside and Santos had been taking "prudent steps" to address oil price weakness by deferring capital spending and pushing out decisions on sanctioning new project investments.
UBS analyst Glyn Lawcock said Oil Search's earnings were most levered to the oil price weakness. On Tuesday, he lowered the Brent crude oil price expectations for this year by 15 per cent to $US35.3 per barrel, down from $US41.5 per barrel.
"Our revised outlook now assumes the effect of a rolling shutdown of the world's major economies over first half of 2020 and some residual effects on GDP and travel – especially aviation – through second half of 2020," he said.
