Oil futures settled higher Tuesday, snapping a five-day losing streak that dragged the U.S. benchmark to its lowest level since early December.
“The broader energy market is likely falling back into its familiar range with WTI trading between $52 and $63” a barrel, analysts at Sevens Report Research wrote in their latest newsletter.
Fundamentals are largely bearish due to oversupply concerns, especially given the huge build in stockpiles reported in the refined products for the week ended Jan. 3, Sevens Report said. Tensions between the U.S. and Iran have eased, though the “threat of more geopolitical unrest still exists and is likely to keep a floor under the market, preventing a decisive breakdown in the near term.”
West Texas Intermediate crude for February delivery US:CLG20 rose 15 cents, or 0.3%, to settle at $58.23 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, while March Brent UK:BRNH20 added 29 cents, or about 0.5%, to $64.49 a barrel on ICE Futures Europe.
WTI, the U.S. benchmark, closed Monday at its lowest level since Dec. 3, while Brent, the global benchmark, saw its lowest close since Dec. 12.
Analysts said oil was buoyed in part by upbeat expectations around the expected signing Wednesday of a so-called phase one U.S.-China trade deal. The terms include a call for China to buy more than $50 billion in energy supplies, Reuters reported , citing a source familiar with the details.
Oil jumped earlier this month as tensions between Iran and the U.S. flared following a U.S. military strike that killed a top Iranian military commander in Iraq . But crude prices gave back gains last week as tensions appeared to ebb following a retaliatory strike by Iran aimed at bases housing U.S. troops in Iraq that produced no casualties.
Analysts said the focus returned to market fundamentals as geopolitical worries faded.
“Unfortunately for the bulls, the fundamental outlook over the first half of this year is not overly constructive. The market is set to see a sizable surplus, which should mean weakness for both the flat price and time spreads,” said Warren Patterson, head of commodities strategy at ING, in a note.
In a monthly report released Tuesday, the Energy Information Administration raised its 2020 forecast for WTI oil prices to $59.25 a barrel, up 7.7% from its forecast a month earlier. For Brent crude, it sees an average of $64.83 in 2020, up 7.1% from its previous forecast.
“Both global oil supply and consumption are expected to grow in 2020, with supply from non-OPEC producers, particularly the Unites States, Norway, Brazil, and Canada, more than offsetting declining production from OPEC,” Dr. Linda Capuano, EIA administrator, said in statement following the report’s release.
For 2020, the EIA sees total global production of petroleum and other liquids at 102.37 million barrels a day and total global consumption at 102.11 million barrels a day.
Separately, the EIA will issue its weekly U.S. petroleum supply report early Wednesday.
Analysts polled by S&P Global Platts expect the report Wednesday to reveal that domestic commercial crude stocks edged up by 500,000 barrels, which would mark a second straight weekly climb. They also forecast supply builds of about 3.3 million barrels for gasoline and 1.3 million barrels for distillates.
On Nymex Tuesday, February gasoline US:RBG20 fell 0.2% to $1.6544 a gallon, while February heating oil US:HOG20 rose about 0.7% at $1.9103 a gallon.
February natural-gas futures US:NGG20 gained 0.2% to $2.187 per million British thermal units. The EIA’s monthly report cut its forecast on 2020 natural-gas prices by 5% to $2.33.
Meanwhile, Reuters reported Tuesday that the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries as its allies, known as OPEC+, may postpone their March meeting to June,  citing Russia’s TASS news agency. If that happens, OPEC+ may extend the end-of-March expiration of its oil output cut deal to June.
OPEC’s website currently lists March 5 for the extraordinary OPEC meeting and March 6 OPEC+ meeting, with OPEC’s ordinary meeting set for June 9, and the OPEC+ summit the next day.
