OPEC+ agrees to output cuts extension, as crude oil prices hit over $42 per barrel
The group has agreed to maintain its current output cut of 9.7 million barrels per day till the end of July as against the 7.7 million barrels per day that was initially planned.
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies (OPEC+) has agreed to extend its current record output cuts by another one month, to further support the oil price recovery. The current output cut, which is to terminate at the end of June, is part of the measures taken by the cartel to help rebalance the oil market.
The agreement to this deal by all member countries, precedes today’s meeting of the alliance, which is currently underway through a video conference. The group has agreed to maintain its current output cut of 9.7 million barrels per day till the end of July as against the 7.7 million barrels per day that was initially planned.
This is a victory for Saudi Arabia and Russia, who have been trying to persuade other members of the alliance to implement these cuts.
The Algerian Oil Minister, who is also the President of OPEC, praised the efforts of Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Kuwait and Oman for offering voluntary additional cuts for the month of June amounting to a total of 1.2 million barrels per day. He said that by the first half of 2020, oil stocks are expected to increase by an unprecedented 1.5 billion barrels.
Nigeria had, a few hours earlier, reconfirmed its commitment under the existing agreement of 9.7 million barrels per day output cut. It had also committed to making additional oil output cuts from July to September to compensate for producing more than its quota in May and June. This was confirmed in a tweet post from the Federal Ministry of Petroleum Resources on its official twitter handle.
Meanwhile, the news of the agreement had made positive impact on crude oil prices.
The Brent crude went up by more than 5%, selling for $42.30 per barrel on Saturday morning. This is the highest in about 3 months. The American WTI crude went up by more than 5% to close at $39.55 per barrel, while the Nigerian Bonny light crude went up by 2.90% to sell for $41.17 per barrel, the highest in 5 months.
Apart from Nigeria, other traditional laggards on OPEC+ output cuts have promised a couple of times to do better this time around, although some analysts are skeptical about this.
Chike Olisah is a graduate of accountancy with over 15 years working experience in the financial service sector. He has worked in research and marketing departments of three top commercial banks. Chike is a senior member of the Nairametrics Editorial Team.
You may contact him via his email- chike.olisah@nairametrics.com.
Your email address will not be published.
Crypto lovers continued to troop to stablecoins, as USDC market cap broke the $1 billion market capitalization.
In just three days, fast-growing cryptocurrency, USDC, a stable coin project founded by Circle and Coinbase, just released 50 million digital coins from its treasury to various wallets in less than 72 hours. Data compiled from Whale Alert, an advanced blockchain tracker, and analytics system showed the time these transactions took place.
According to Coinbase a leading American based crypto exchange, the consortium that mints USDC, collectively holds US$1.00 for every single USDC. These funds are held in a special bank account that is constantly monitored and audited.
Crypto lovers continued to troop to stablecoins, as USD Coin’s (USDC) market cap broke the $1 billion market capitalization threshold for the first time since the stablecoin was launched in October 2018.
Quick Fact: USDC is a fully collateralized US dollar stablecoin. It is an Ethereum powered coin and is the brainchild of CENTRE, an open-source project bootstrapped by contributions from Circle and Coinbase. USDCs are issued by regulated and licensed financial institutions that maintain full reserves of the equivalent fiat currency in a 1 USDC:1 USD ratio.
Things you must know: Investors of stablecoins make money by earning dividends from the newly created digital coins being given to them for holding such stablecoin stock.
Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils.
Brent crude gained about 0.68%, to trade at $43.08 a barrel by 5.01 am local time, after a 4.3% gain recorded in the previous week.
The implied volatility for Brent crude price has plunged to the lowest levels triggered by prices collapsing at the end of Q1 2020 as many oil traders shifted their attention to tightening oil output due to the agreement with the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and its allies.
Quick fact: Brent crude is the leading global benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils. The international benchmark is used to set the price of crude oil for about two-thirds of the world’s traded crude oil, including Nigeria’s crude (Bonny Light, Brass River, Qua Iboe, etc.).
Stephen Innes, Chief Global Market Strategist at AxiCorp, in a note to Nairametrics, explained in detail the positive macros affecting oil prices. He said:
“Positive macro inflection points – most recently, the rebound in US employment – continue to support oil despite the disquieting trajectory in the US coronavirus cases.
“OPEC production, which is at the lowest level since 1991 has also been helping, both with sentiment and the fundamentals for oil.
“And while the rebalancing of supply and demand still seems to be occurring more quickly than expected, risks remain. OPEC’s planned July 15 meeting may address the possibility of once again extending the most extensive phase of the OPEC+ production cut agreement.”
Amid rising numbers of COVID-19 cases in major cities of the world’s largest economy and consumer of crude oil, a Reuters tally showed that in the first four days of July alone, 15 states in America reported upward movement in the number of new COVID-19 infections, with events over the holiday possibly triggering another upsurge.
The exchange rate could strengthen this week based on a positive set of assumptions.
The exchange rate between the naira and dollar may move in the positive for Nigeria’s local currency, according to views of a cross section of traders and analysts interviewed by Nairametrics.
Last week, Nairametrics reported that the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) had increased the bid price for FX at its Secondary Market Intervention Sales (SMIS) window by 5.6% to trade at N380 to $1. This was in line with the apex bank’s plans to unify the exchange rate towards the NAFEX rate.
As traders mulled the implication of the latest move by the CBN, the naira depreciated against the dollar at the parallel market to trade at N461.00 to $1, while gaining against the US dollar to trade at N386 to $1 at the I&E window. However, the exchange rate could strengthen this week based on a positive set of assumptions.
A treasury dealer at Nigeria’s biggest bank by assets told Nairametrics about the Central Bank’s continual intervention in the currency spot market and outlook for the naira. He said:
“The CBN will sustain its interventions in various windows with injection of $100million to Invisibles and Small and Medium-scale Enterprises (SMEs) segment at ₦384 to a dollar. Also, the CBN will inject c.$250million through the Retail SMIS on Friday.
“With the increase in base rate at last week’s Retail Auction to $/₦380 from the $/₦365, I expect similar revision of the official rate from $/₦361 to IEFX level in line with rate unification exercise which would boost Naira revenue from crude oil sale and qualify the CBN to draw-down from the IMF/World bank loan.
“The paucity of funds that IEFX window has experienced since the start of the Q2 will persist this week. Though, I expect the CBN to come up with plans to clear the backlogs of FX demands estimated at c. $5bn for offshores investors just like it did in 2016. Nevertheless, I expect Naira to trade at sub $/₦400 levels throughout the week.
“With this move in unifying the exchange rate system, it is also expected that the present converging of the rates estimated at N387 to $1 (I &E Window) will boost revenues for the federal government which could see a gain of N20 on every US dollar earning in oil.”
Whilst the debate rages on about what the true value of the naira is, several factors are at play. The CBN Governor had alluded to the fact that the lull in business activities suggested that forex demand should be low, thus calling into question the pent-up demand being highlighted by several market analysts.
The Central Bank governor suggested that the black-market rates being reported were likely not representative of what the real demand was, but rather driven by speculative forces.
Michael Nwakalor, Macroeconomist at CardinalStone Research, in a phone chat interview with Nairametrics expressed optimism on the naira appreciating at the black market this week. He said:
“Amid purported pressure from multilateral organizations for a unified exchange rate, the naira has noticeably weakened at both the NAFEX and parallel markets in recent weeks, with reports of a devaluation at the SMIS window from N360/$ to N380/$.
“We expect a possible unification to converge towards the NAFEX rate of N385/$ and if supported by increased FX supply and clear body language by the CBN, we may also see a steep recovery in the parallel market towards that rate. In the absence of this, we expect a characteristically quiet week in the FX market.”
Conversely, market analysts believe that the reluctance of the CBN to fund liquidity shortages at the I&E window is the reason why the black market has depreciated to about N461/$1. They claim legitimate transactions have already taken place in the parallel market, especially for businesses that have obligations to meet but cannot access forex from official windows.
Thelma Ugonna Ohiri-Anyanwu, CFA, a leading financial expert in a Nigerian tier-1 bank, was also optimistic about the naira stabilizing this week. She said:
“With the CBN devaluing the currency by 5.3% from N360 to N380 at its latest currency auction, this saw the market close at about N389 to a dollar. This I believe is in a bid at unifying the rate at the various windows.
“In the coming week, with little or no significant activities to stimulate the market and no fundamental change, the naira will be relatively stable.
“The I&E window will likely trade around N388-389/$ levels. While the parallel market at N460 to 461/$ levels.”
CBN’s foreign reserves fell slightly during the week as FX outflows outpaced inflows. Data from Nigeria’s central bank showed that its foreign reserves stood at about $36.2billion.
