Questor: coronavirus has decimated oil companies’ shares – and, sadly for us, their bonds too
Readers will know by now our attitude to the current crisis : “Hold on grimly; in the end things will recover and our holdings will generate their dividends and interest payments.”
But we must make one exception.
No part of the stock market has suffered more in the current sell-off than oil stocks. In the end the profitability of every oil producer, no matter how well run, hangs on the price of crude oil – and that price has collapsed as the coronavirus has spread.
Brent crude, a popular yardstick, reached a 2020 peak of almost $70 a barrel in early January. The current price is $32.90: that’s a fall of more than 50pc. The FTSE 100 index’s decline of about 31pc over the same period seems almost mild by comparison.
The markets fear that the epidemic will cause a drastic slowdown in economic activity, which would in turn lead to much lower demand for oil. After all, when the populations of entire countries, such as Italy , are told to stay at home, they won’t be using their cars or public transport.
Neither can they shop, except for essentials, so the lorries that normally bring goods to stores every day will be idle. Many flights have been cancelled.
As a result the share prices of the world’s giant oil companies have suffered severely . Shell has lost about 53pc of its value since this year’s peak in the crude price, while BP’s shares have fallen by about 45pc.
But these companies have a long history of surviving tough times. BP managed to meet the vast cost of the Deepwater Horizon disaster in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 without going bust; Shell has not cut its dividend since the war despite the enormous peaks and troughs in the oil price over that period.
While these stocks do not feature in our Income Portfolio, we would advise any readers who hold them to resist any temptation to sell: as we have often said, a company’s true value depends on its flow of profits far into the future and it does not seem likely to us that Shell’s profitability has been halved on a permanent basis, even if it has for a year or two.
It’s a different story, however, for the smaller, less well established oil explorers, as the market has been quick to acknowledge.
Shares in London-listed Tullow Oil have lost 80pc of their value since the price of crude peaked in January and, closer to home as far as this portfolio is concerned, Premier Oil’s shares have fallen by a terrifying 88pc over the same period.
