SCOTLAND'S economy has been dealt a major blow after the North Sea's oil shares plunged to its lowest level in 18 years.
Sign up for FREE now and never miss the top politics stories again.
We will use your email address only for sending you newsletters. Please see our Privacy Notice for details of your data protection rights.
Nicola Sturgeon is under pressure after the North Sea’s Brent crude, the international oil standard, slumped 5 percent to just $23 per barrel - its lowest level since November 2002 amid the coronavirus pandemic. And leading economic think tank, the Fraser of Allander institute, warned the coronavirus crisis was pushing Scotland into a recession and Scotland’s oil industry could decline quickly.
It comes amid warnings the coronavirus outbreak will bring the North Sea oil and gas industry to its knees.
The news is a massive blow to First Minister Ms Sturgeon and is at a particularly critical time for Scotland, which heavily depends on oil revenue to prop up its economy.
Scotland possesses 96 percent of the UK’s crude oil and 63 percent of natural gas production.
Sturgeon's economy has been delivered a blow (Image: GETTY )
Sturgeon had pinned her independence hopes on being able to secure sole ownership of the oil fields (Image: GETTY )
Ms Sturgeon had pinned her independence hopes on being able to secure sole ownership of the oil fields, which sit in the UK’s territorial waters, to underpin the Scottish economy.
But in a major blow, Brent crude oil plunged amid a raging crude price war between Saudi Arabia and Russia, which continues to drive supply despite travel restrictions hitting demand.
Oil slipped below 20 US dollars a barrel overnight to its lowest figure since 2002.
North Sea workers have been warned of job losses amid the coronavirus pandemic (Image: GETTY )
Despite recovering slightly on Monday morning, it still remained 10.8 percent lower for the day at 22.9 dollars.
Meanwhile, tens of thousands of offshore workers are out of work with the North Sea workforce plunging by around 40 per cent as companies battle against the invisible killer virus.
It comes after Mairi Spowage, deputy director of the Fraser of Allander institute, issued a bleak outlook for Scotland’s economy during the deadly pandemic
