SGX Nifty down 40 points; here's what changed for market while you were sleeping
The index formed a bearish candle on the daily chart with a longer lower wick, reflecting the recovery from the day's low.
The rupee dropped by 17 paise to close at a fresh six-week low of 76.20 against the US dollar on Tuesday amid escalation in border tension with China.
Rising tension on the Indo-China border that resulted in 20 casualties on the Indian side and a pause in global markets following the recent rally may keep a check on optimism on Dalal Street on Wednesday.
Here’s breaking down the pre-market actions.
Nifty futures on the Singapore Exchange traded 42 points, or 0.42 per cent lower at 9,843.50, in signs that Dalal Street was headed for a negative start on Wednesday.
The index formed a bearish candle on the daily chart with a longer lower wick, reflecting the recovery from the day's low. Analysts said Nifty will face immediate resistance in the 9,960-10,000 range while the 9,726 level continues to be the immediate support to watch out for.
Japan's benchmark Nikkei 225 index fell 0.31 per cent, or 70.43 points, to 22,511.78. Hong Kong's Hang Seng edged up 0.08 per cent, or 19.30 points, to 24,363.39. China's Shanghai Composite was flat, inching up 0.92 points to 2,932.67.
Oil prices retreated on Wednesday, weighed down by an increase in US crude inventories and worries about a potential second wave of the coronavirus pandemic. Brent crude futures were down 40 cents, or 1 per cent, at $40.56 a barrel.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 526.82 points, or 2.04 per cent, to 26,289.98, the S&P 500 gained 58.15 points, or 1.90 per cent, to 3,124.74 and the Nasdaq Composite added 169.84 points, or 1.75 per cent, to 9,895.87.
Muthoot Finance, Fortis Healthcare: Cummins India, Aban Offshore, Emkay Global, Fortis Healthcare, HEG, Indraprastha Gas, Indostar Capital, ITD Cementation, JK Cement, Mangalam Cement, Muthoot Finance, Natco Pharma, Pidilite Industries, REC are scheduled to announce their March quarter earnings on Wednesday.
Net-net, foreign portfolio investors (FPIs) were sellers of domestic stocks to the tune of Rs 1,478.52 crore, data available with NSE suggested. DIIs were net buyers to the tune of Rs 1,161.51 crore, data suggests.
Rupee: The rupee dropped by 17 paise to close at a fresh six-week low of 76.20 against the US dollar on Tuesday amid escalation in border tension with China.
10-year bonds: India 10-year bond yield rose 0.93 per cent to 5.84 after trading in 5.79-5.86 range.
Call rates: The overnight call money rate weighted average stood at 3.58 per cent, according to RBI data. It moved in a range of 1.80-4.05 per cent.
20 soldiers killed in China border clash… The Indian Army has raised the death toll in a clash with Chinese troops on a disputed Himalayan border from three to 20 Indian soldiers. The army said in a statement late Tuesday that the two sides ``have disengaged'' from the disputed Galwan area where they clashed overnight on Monday.
Fed bond buying to boost FPI flows… Fresh US measures to lift a sagging local economy through a dedicated corporate bond buying programme should enhance the flow of overseas funds into India, which is set to outdo competing markets in generating investment returns over the next year. Analysts hope that the rising cash pool overseas will likely trigger a bout of FPI inflows into debt and equities and global investors seeking higher yields in emerging markets will certainly consider India. Investments in rupee-denominated assets are likely to yield higher at least by the end of the next calendar year, Bloomberg data showed.
India-focused FPIs may shift out of HK… New Delhi may cause several overseas portfolio investors in Indian assets to ditch their North Asian base of Hong Kong and drop anchor in the Lion City of Singapore instead. With India planning to impose curbs even on portfolio investments coming from neighbouring countries, including China, European and American funds investing in the country want to move out of Hong Kong, unwilling to be put at a disadvantage in comparison with peers based out of Singapore or Mauritius.
India’s employment rate up 3.3%… India’s employment rate improved by 3.3 percentage points to 35.7% for the week ended June 14, as businesses started reopening and people joined the workforce, showed a weekly survey by the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy. Though this is the highest weekly jump so far, it continues to be lower than the employment rate of 39.5% in the pre-Covid-19 days during the three months ending February.
India Inc shifts to bigger banks…. Indian companies are fleeing small banks and moving towards larger lenders as slower economic growth, build up in nonperforming assets, liquidity issues and the demand destruction caused by the coronavirus pandemic have shaken customer confidence in the banking sector, particularly private lenders. This has led to a flight to safety and a surge in customer deposits and corporate relationships with bigger and more stable banks such as State Bank of India, ICICI, Axis and HDFC Bank, showed a study
BNP Paribas shuts wealth division…. French bank BNP Paribas has decided to shut its domestic unit that caters to the country’s rich investors. High costs, growing losses and shrinking margins may have prompted BNP to close its domestic wealth unit after two decades of existence in the country, said people familiar with the matter. BNP Paribas Wealth Management, the largest foreign wealth manager in India, handled client money worth $14.72 billion (about Rs 1.1 lakh crore) as of December 2019.
Q1 advance tax flow drops 79%... India Inc's advance tax payments for the first quarter plummeted sharply by 79% to Rs 8,500 crore, reflecting a severe economic downturn and muted corporate profits in the coming months. Economists said the reductions were in line with expectations for the full year with growth forecasts in the negative, more so due to the lockdown which almost obliterated demand, consumption and economic activity in the first quarter. Lower tax payments, they said, also indicated possible deferral of payments owing to liquidity crunch being faced by businesses.
Health insurance not enough for Covid treatment…. A medical insurance policy may not be enough to protect you from exorbitant costs being charged by some hospitals for coronavirus treatment, latest claims data for the insurance industry shows. The average insurance settlement for a patient hospitalised for coronavirus is Rs 90,118 — significantly short of the average claim size of Rs 1.56 lakh. This was revealed in the latest industry data periodically compiled by the General Insurance Council.
