U.S. stocks followed Asian markets higher Monday as investors shrugged off worries about rising coronavirus infections in the United States and some other countries and focused on hopes for an economic recovery.
The Dow Jones industrial average climbed 430 points, joining a worldwide upturn headlined by the best day for Chinese stocks in nearly five years. The Standard & Poor’s 500 rose 1.5%, on pace for its fifth straight day of gains.
The Nasdaq Composite gained 1.8%, on track to close at another record.
All of the 11 sectors in the S&P 500 index were higher, led by gains in big technology companies. Shares of Apple, Amazon and Microsoft each rose more than 1% apiece.
Beaten-up industries like cruise liners and airlines that are closely tied to a reopening also rose, with Carnival and Royal Caribbean rising 1.7% and 3.6%, respectively. United and American Airlines both added at least 3%.
U.S. shares have rallied despite a surge in new cases in populous states like Florida, Texas and California. That has prompted some governors to halt reopening of businesses or to order others to re-close.
The U.S. has seen more than 2.8 million confirmed cases and more than 129,000 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University data. Globally, there have been almost 11.5 million cases and more than 530,000 deaths.
A dream home, a vintage school bus and quirky roller skates: Here's what couples are buying with their pandemic wedding funds
“The good news is that the trend in daily deaths continues to decline, but the big increase in hospitalizations is likely to push up deaths over the next couple of weeks,” Ian Shepherdson, chief economist of Pantheon Macroeconomics, said in a note.  “We're expecting to see that the rate of increase in total cases has slowed, but it needs to slow substantially further before the number of new cases per day begins to fall.”
Share prices have risen as some countries ease anti-virus measures and reopened businesses. U.S. stocks added to recent gains Monday following a stronger-than-expected jobs report for June on Friday in a holiday-shortened trading week.
Forecasters warn the surge might be too early to be sustained by uncertain economic conditions.
“While the markets are focusing on recovery and ignoring a possible potential setback from the virus spike, we believe caution is warranted more than ever,” Peter Cardillo, chief market economist at Spartan Capital Securities, said in a note.
On Monday, shares of Dominion Energy fell 5% after Berkshire Hathaway said it will acquire the company’s natural gas transmission and storage business, valued at nearly $10 billion including assumed debt. Berkshire Hathaway rose 2.6%.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury rose to 0.70% from 0.67% Thursday. U.S. markets were closed Friday in observance of July 4.
In energy markets, benchmark U.S. crude shed 13 cents to $40.52 per barrel in electronic trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude, used to price international oils, rose 34 cents in London to $43.14 per barrel.
Elsewhere, the FTSE 100 in London rose 1.7% and Frankfurt’s DAX added 1.6%. The CAC 40 in France advanced 1.6%. In Asia, the Shanghai Composite Index rose 5.7% and the Nikkei 225 in Tokyo gained 1.8%. The Hang Seng in Hong Kong added 3.8%.
