By Charlie Pinkerton . Published on Jul 2, 2020 2:00pm
The Supreme Court of Canada building, located in downtown Ottawa. Jan. 3, 2020. Jolson Lim/iPolitics
The Supreme Court of Canada has rejected a request from a group of First Nations to challenge the federal government’s approval of the Trans Mountain pipeline expansion project.
Squamish Nation, Tsleil-Waututh Nation, Ts’elxweyeqw Tribes and Coldwater Indian Band in B.C. were seeking a leave to appeal a decision by the Federal Court of Appeal from earlier this year that found cabinet’s approval of the pipeline project to be reasonable under the law.
In typical fashion, the court did not release reasons for its decision.
Tsleil-Waututh Chief Leah George-Wilson had previously said the Federal Court of Appeal’s decision was a setback for reconciliation.
“If unchallenged, it could change the way consultation and consultation cases happen in Canada, making it less meaningful for protecting our inherent constitutionally protected Aboriginal rights,” George-Wilson said, as CBC News reported.
Natural Resources Canada published a statement from Natural Resources Minister Seamus O’Regan after it was made public that the Supreme Court had dismissed the appeal, saying the government “welcomes” the decision.
The U.S. pipeline company Energy Transfer is invoking force majeure to prevent oil firms from backing out of a proposed expansion of the Dakota Access pipeline, sources told Reuters.
Energy Transfer’s project intends to nearly double the size of the controversial pipeline, which some companies that are on board say is no longer necessary because of the fall in the U.S. oil production that’s followed the COVID-19 pandemic.
There were suggestions a few weeks ago when Apple unveiled its new data tracking human mobility trends that the real-time data would be valuable for tracking fuel demand, which could benefit energy merchants. However, because it’s now known that the mobility data is based on search information rather than miles travelled, it’s now believed the information does not correlate as strongly to demand as was previously believed. Reuters has more.
On Thursday morning at 10:42 a.m., West Texas Intermediate was trading at US$39.75, while Brent Crude was trading at US$42.19.
For more about the Trans Mountain pipeline expansion, check out this piece from the Canadian Press. It’s a documentation of the timeline, beginning in 1953, of the key dates in the pipeline’s history.
