Take a helicopter ride from the east Scottish coast, across the North Sea towards Norway. Looking down, you will see what to a true oilman is a depressing site – an oilfield is being decommissioned.
This is the Brent field, once a huge national asset and a mainstay of the British economy. Now, however, its reserves are so depleted that production is no longer economically viable.
But if the Brent field’s best days are in the past, Brent crude futures , fittingly enough, have much to look forward to.
That may seem strange, given the declining output of the field from which it takes its name. However, in energy markets Brent is the most important “benchmark”, and is referenced in between a half and two-thirds of all contracts for the supply of crude oil.
The solution to the paradox of a near-defunct oilfield appearing in so many oil contracts lies in the nature of commodity markets. Central to commodity trading is the notion of a “standard”, the abovementioned benchmark.
Benchmarks allow traders to do business, confident that, wherever the commodity in question originates, it will be interchangeable – “fungible”, in the jargon – with other commodities of the same benchmark.
This is especially important in the derivatives market, such as those for Brent crude oil futures. Traders dealing in commodities that will not be delivered for a certain period of time absolutely need the security that benchmarks give.
Brent describes a standard of crude oil that is “sweet”, or light in sulphur, and “light”, or of a lower density than some other crudes. Any oil that meets the Brent specification can feature in a Brent contract, and the Brent standard is used in contracts not only in Europe but in Africa and the Middle East.
Futures are one of two types of derivatives, the other being options. The former obliges the holder to buy or sell on a given date at a particular price, while the latter merely gives them the option to do so.
Because options are more flexible, they are also more expensive.
Futures are sometimes called “forward” contracts, but these days “forward” is usually used to describe a contract intended to run to physical delivery of the commodity in question, such as a large quantity of cocoa beans for a chocolate manufacturer.
By contrast, the vast majority of futures contracts will never run to delivery and are closed out, with the two parties to the contract working out who has gained relative to the immediate, or “spot”, price on that day and settling accounts for cash.
It follows that futures traders are, in large part, placing bets on the likely path of, in this case, Brent crude. How does it work?
Brent crude futures are traded on the Intercontinental Exchange, although traders can get involved in the market through contracts for difference. The standard contract size on the exchange is 1,000 barrels, and any number of such contracts can be bought and sold. Contracts are priced in US dollars , the globally accepted denomination for oil prices.
These are references to the “contract month”, the month in which either accounts must be settled or physical delivery of the commodity be made. The ICE states, regarding Brent: “Trading shall cease…on the last business day of the second month preceding the relevant contract month (e.g. the March contract month will expire on the last business day of January).”
If that sounds like a recipe for a nerve-wracking few weeks, that is because it is. Commodity trading in general is not for the faint-hearted, and that goes twice over for futures trading.
Once a futures position has been taken, all the trader can do is sit back and wait to see if events will vindicate their stance or leave them out of pocket. They cannot intervene, making them something of a passenger as settlement day draws nearer.
Of course, it is always possible to enter offsetting contracts should the Brent crude futures price appear to be moving away from the trader’s initial forecast. For example, your futures position was based on a rising price for Brent crude and all the indications point to a fall.
So, a second contract, predicting a price fall, should offer some protection. But buying such a contract will be more expensive than it would have been had you bought it at the outset.
An alternative is simply to sell the original contract. But even if you can find a buyer for a contract that threatens to end up “under water”, in market-speak, by settlement day, you probably won’t get a very good price for it.
All that said, Brent crude futures trading can be a hugely rewarding activity, financially and intellectually. The factors influencing Brent, and that other major benchmark, West Texas Intermediate (WTI) , span the world of politics, geology, war, peace and, of course, economics.
A successful trader of Brent crude futures will need some knowledge of diplomatic developments, of the latest news on exploration, of regulatory changes and their impact on oil demand and of up-to-the-minute forecasts for economic growth and world trade.
More than most assets, with the possible exception of foreign exchange, oil is an intensely political commodity, with governments around the world routinely seeking to influence the price, not least through the 14-nation Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). That is not a reason to avoid trading Brent crude futures, but it underlines the need to read widely and be aware of developments.
Finally, unless you are planning to open an oil refinery, be sure to have settled your contract before physical delivery is due. That sounds obvious, but not everyone quite grasps the distinction between physical delivery and routine futures trading. Some years ago, what was then the International Petroleum Exchange (IPE), now part of the Intercontinental Exchange, received a ship-to-shore phone call from a Russian oil tanker, wishing to unload its cargo at the IPE, based in the smart London riverside development of St Katherine’s Dock and with no oil storage facilities at all.
To the IPE’s horror, the tanker was heading up the River Thames at that moment and had to be urged in the strongest terms to turn round.
