MOSCOW, July 6 (Reuters) - The rouble fell to a six-week low against the dollar on Monday as dividend season prompted some investors to convert their rouble payouts into foreign currency.
Demand for dollars also increased along with a recovery in importers’ business activity.
Fears over potential new British sanctions and several spikes in COVID-19 cases worldwide also limited the rouble’s appeal, despite support from rising oil prices and continued FX sales by the central bank.
The rouble strengthened in early trade before paring gains and slipping past 72 to the dollar. But Russian stocks held firm, with the rouble-based MOEX Russian index climbing to a four-month high, boosted by rising commodities prices.
By 1126 GMT, the rouble was 0.9% weaker against the dollar at 72.00, having earlier hit 72.08, its weakest since May 22.
It had lost 1.4% to trade at 81.42 versus the euro , a two-month low.
Brent crude oil, a global benchmark for Russia’s main export, was up 1.1% at $43.28 a barrel.
Certain Russian individuals could face asset freezes and visa bans from the United Kingdom from Monday, with Britain set to list the first foreign nationals included in its new post-Brexit sanctions scheme that follows the 2012 U.S. Magnitsky Act.
“Sanctions risks, coupled with a low oil price and a fall in the volume of its exports, are the main threat to the Russian currency,” said Alexei Antonov, head analyst at Alor Brokerage.
The growing demand for imports and the start of a dividend payout period for companies that have not changed their policies in the wake of the coronavirus crisis were playing against the rouble, said Dmitry Polevoy, chief economist at the Russian Direct Investment Fund.
Record increases in coronavirus cases in 15 U.S. states in the first four days of July clouded the economic horizon and prevented a speedy return to thriving business activity, even as bullish investors around the world fed stock market growth.
Russia’s dollar-denominated RTS index was up 0.7% to 1,244.3 points. The MOEX index was 1.5% higher at 2,843.4 points, earlier reaching its highest mark since March 5.
“A broad advance can be expected across the Russia equity universe today,” Alfa Bank said.
