U.S. Crude Oil Is Gaining on Brent Crude. Why That Matters.
U.S. benchmark oil has outperformed the global benchmark this year, leading prices in recent weeks to the narrowest spread in more than a year. Analysts say the move isn’t about the trade war.
The spread between front-month West Texas Intermediate crude and Brent crude narrowed to as little as $3.53 a barrel on Aug. 19—the narrowest since July 20, 2018, according to Dow Jones Market Data. On Sept. 4, WTI futures settled at $56.26 a barrel while Brent futures finished at $60.70, a difference of $4.44. On the first trading day of this year, that spread was closer to $7.
“Historically, we have seen that spread go the other way, with WTI trading at a premium to Brent,” says Ryan Dusek, a director in Opportune’s Commodity Risk Advisory group.
The price difference is important to producers and refiners because it affects revenue. The spread also helps the market monitor supply and demand. A narrow spread indicates a tighter balance of supply and demand.
Growth in pipeline capacity contributed to the narrower spread, allowing more oil to flow from the Permian Basin into trading hubs in Houston and Corpus Christi, Texas, where it gets a better price and makes its way to export markets, says Noah Barrett, research analyst at Janus Henderson Investors.
Production from the Permian Basin, the largest crude-producing region in the U.S., has outpaced the pipeline capacity to bring that oil to market, prompting an expansion of pipeline infrastructure, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. That included a conversion of the Seminole-Red this year into a 200,000-barrel-per-day crude pipeline.
When pipeline space is constrained, exploration and production companies compete for scarce pipe capacity by cutting prices to obtain access, says Stewart Glickman, energy equity analyst at CFRA Research. That weighed on WTI but not Brent, and helped contribute to a wider spread. But with new U.S. pipe capacity operational, WTI got a lift, leading to a narrower spread.
The U.S.-China trade war is not a factor in the spread’s compression. It actually contributes to a wider WTI-Brent spread, says Rebecca Babin, a senior energy trader at CIBC Private Wealth Management. “The much larger issue is what the trade war implies for global demand growth,” she says. Chinese tariffs on U.S. crude make it less attractive for imports by China, which would lead to a wider spread.
Producers have reduced output since the start of the year in an effort to balance supply and demand. The Joint Ministerial Monitoring Committee, which includes members and some non-members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC+) who oversee compliance with the output-cut deal, plans to meet on Sept. 12.
Based on supply and demand estimates, OPEC+ may need to cut one million barrels per day in 2020 to eliminate the supply overhang, Babin says. “Messaging from OPEC+ is expected to be very supportive of the commodity, and anything less will be bearish” for prices, she says.
Opportune’s Dusek says that he doesn’t expect major news out of OPEC. Still, “they are in a tough spot right now. With slower demand and cuts for the foreseeable future, they are running out of options,” he says. Dusek expects prices to climb before a significant decline in the long term. He says WTI could rise to a range of $65 to $70 in the short-term, but prices are then likely to “grind down for the next three to four years,” with WTI eventually bottoming out at about $20.
