Oil futures ended higher Thursday and logged their highest settlement since mid-September, with global benchmark prices stretching their gains to a sixth consecutive session.
Oil’s climb came a day after data showed a weekly decline in U.S. crude inventories.
On the New York Mercantile Exchange, West Texas Intermediate crude for January delivery US:CLF20 rose 29 cents, or 0.5%, to finish at $61.22 a barrel. The contract expired at the end of the session. February WTI crude US:CLG20, the new front-month contract, rose by 33 cents, or 0.5%, to settle at $61.18.
February Brent crude UK:BRNG20 added 37 cents, or 0.6%, to settle at $66.54 a barrel on ICE Futures Europe. That stretched its streak of gains to a sixth consecutive session, the longest winning streak since Jan. 10 when the market rose for 10 straight sessions, according to Dow Jones Market Data.
Oil on Wednesday bounced back from early losses after the Energy Information Administration on reported that U.S. crude supplies fell by 1.1 million barrels for the week ended Dec. 13. That was less than the 2.5 million-barrel average decline expected by analysts polled by S&P Global Platts, but came as a relief after the American Petroleum Institute on Tuesday had reported a 4.7 million-barrel climb.
The market should see further supply declines “into the end of the year due to year-end tax consequences of destocking,” said Tariq Zahir, managing member at Tyche Capital Advisors. Crude inventory holders tend to lower supplies at year-end in a move to reduce tax costs.
Prices for oil may move lower in the first quarter of 2020 “due to slow demand,” Zahir said. “Of course, any problems with the China phase one deal we could see an accelerated move to the downside” as worries about energy demand resurface.
On Thursday, however, China revealed a list of import tariff exemptions for six chemical and oil products from the U.S., according to a report from CNBC .
Chinese tariff concessions on six U.S. petroleum products are “boosting trade confidence, although the concessions actually announced are insubstantial,” said Manish Raj, chief financial officer at Velandera Energy.
For now, however, oil remains bolstered by more optimistic expectations on the global economy and in the wake of the decision earlier this month by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies, a group known as OPEC+, to deepen production cuts, said Stephen Innes, chief Asia market strategist at AxiTrader.
But Innes and other analysts remain concerned about data showing weak-handed speculative traders have built up substantial long positions in futures which could provide fodder for forced selling if prices turn south.
“So, in the absence of definitive macro catalysts over a typically quiet holiday period, this could leave sentiment vulnerable to news flow. As such, the oil rally is showing signs of petering out as traders heed caution by de-risking and banking some hard-earned profits,” he said.
In other energy trade, January gasoline US:RBF20 rose 1.4% to $1.7068 a gallon, while January heating oil US:HOF20 rose 0.5% to $2.0295 a gallon.
January natural gas US:NGF20 declined by 1.3 cents, or 0.6%, to settle at $2.273 per million British thermal units, giving up earlier gains seen in the wake of the latest U.S. supply figures.
The EIA on Thursday reported that domestic supplies of natural gas fell by 107 billion cubic feet for the week ended Dec. 13. Analysts expected a fall of 93 billion cubic feet, on average, according to a survey conducted by S&P Global Platts.
Our call of the day has charted out some highs and lows for the S&P 500 that investors need to watch out for in coming weeks and months. And here’s what could cause a trigger.
