U.S. benchmark oil futures settled higher on Tuesday, getting a lift from global supply cuts and signs of improving demand, following a volatile trading session that ended with the expiration of the June contract.
West Texas Intermediate crude-oil prices settled in backwardation on Monday, a condition in which the spot price and nearby futures are bid higher than contracts for later delivery. The June WTI Nymex contract price also ended Tuesday above the July contract, which is now the front month.
That has marked a shift from the contango trade , in which later dated futures are bid higher than nearby contracts, signaling a near-term supply glut and offering incentive to store a commodity for future use.
Futures prices traded in contango last month, when the May contract settled at a negative price on April 20 , a day ahead of its expiration. “There was limited refinery demand and clearly nowhere to put any purchased oil,” said Tyler Richey, co-editor at Sevens Report Research.
The move into backwardation, however, “shows that there is both strong demand for physical crude...as well as available storage to take delivery,” he said in Tuesday's newsletter.
On Tuesday, June WTI crude US:CLM20, which expired at the end of the session, held ground above the price for the July contract, ending at $32.50 a barrel, up 68 cents, or 2.1%, after surging 8.1% on Monday .
, which is the most-actively traded, added 31 cents, or 1%, to settle at $31.96 a barrel, following a 7.2% rally for the contract in the previous session.
Meanwhile, global benchmark Brent crude for July delivery BRN.1,
UK:BRNN20 lost 16 cents, or 0.5%, to $34.65 a barrel on ICE Futures Europe, after a 7.1% climb Monday. It marked its first loss in four sessions.
An agreement between the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and their allies to cut some 9.7 million barrels a day in oil through the end of June have helped to stem a flood of crude against a backdrop of demand that had been declining, hurt by lockdowns to stop the spread of COVID-19.
U.S. oil production has also fallen and there are signs of further declines ahead. Crude-oil production from seven major U.S. shale plays is forecast to decline by 197,000 barrels a day in June to 7.822 million barrels a day, according to a report from the Energy Information Administration released Monday.
on Friday reported a ninth straight weekly decrease in the number of active U.S. oil rigs.
Data on weekly U.S. petroleum supplies will be released late Tuesday by trade group the American Petroleum Institute and early Wednesday by the EIA.
Analysts polled by S&P Global Platts, on average, expect the EIA to report a climb of 2.4 million in crude supplies for the week ended May 15, along with a decline of 3.5 million barrels in gasoline inventories and an increase of 3.2 million barrels for distillate stocks.
On Nymex, June gasoline US:RBM20 rose 1.9% to $1.0452 a gallon, while June heating oil US:HOM20 fell by 3.3% to 97.36 cents a gallon.
