Can children pass on the coronavirus disease?
The Aussie dollar is falling because China, Australia's major trading partner, is at the epicentre of the coronavirus outbreak which has the global supply of products and services used by industry and consumers.
It is also falling because the Reserve Bank is expected to further cut interest rates to help boost the ailing economy.
Australia's economy is taking a multi-billion dollar hit from both the coronavirus and the bushfires. The RBA cut official rates to a new record low of 0.5 per cent last week .
Treasurer Josh Frydenberg worked to dampen fears about the market plunge, saying volatility was not uncommon.
"As you will be aware, there are many factors behind movements in equity markets," he said.
"And I note that some announcements by the Russians and the Saudis in relation to oil overnight, and we've seen a steep drop in the oil price in recent weeks.
"So there are a number of factors at play when it comes to the equity markets, but our financial system remains strong, our economy remains strong.
"This is a very different situation to what we saw through the GFC, which was essentially, a problem with the banking and the financial system and issues of liquidity.
"We haven't seen those same problems in relation to this health crisis. What we have seen is a supply and demand side constraints, and that's where our [stimulus] package will be focused."
The ASX 200 is now at the lowest since January 2019, the quickest correction on record.
CMC Markets strategist Michael McCarthy said the stock market rout was far from over even though shares had fallen sharply from their record highs.
"Because at some stage in the future there will be a brighter outlook and a time to buy," he said.
Oil stocks have led the losses, with the ASX 200 index in the red across the board.
PNG-based oil producer Oil Search lost more than one third of its value to $3.30, while Santos lost 27 per cent to $4.89. The big banks saw big falls on the prospect of another cut in interest rates.
ANZ lost $20.27 or 8.5 per cent while the Commonwealth Bank fell 6.5 per cent.
Investors are turning to gold as a safe haven — Newcrest Mining jumped 2.54 per cent to $29.82.
