The former secretary of state told Tapper he thinks the United States' moral standing on the world stage has been "demonized" under Trump's leadership.
"They're looking at these demonstrations. They see that these are demonstrations that are justified. And not to be criticized. They see that George, as the President called him, was murdered and the President comes out and says, 'Well, George is looking down from heaven and blessing what I'm doing.' How can you expect anybody to believe things like that?" Powell asked.
The former secretary of state and son of immigrants became emotional as he told Tapper that America's allies, as well as some of its adversaries, are looking at how the nation is caring for its citizens and not understanding what they are witnessing.
"Are we insulting everybody? Are we going after immigrants? They don't understand this," Powell said.
"I'm the son of immigrants. I wouldn't be here if my parents couldn't come here in banana boats in the 1920s. This is America. This is who we are. And the world doesn't understand."
The international community has in recent days condemned the killing of Floyd, expressing shock and horror at his death.
Though few leaders have criticized Trump by name in the wake of the unrest, Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez said last week that "we are all very concerned about the authoritarian debate and those authoritarian ways that we are seeing as a response to some demonstrations."
And at home in the US, Trump's former Defense Secretary, James Mattis, said in a blistering statement last week that Trump "does not even pretend to try" to unite the country and is instead engaged in a "deliberate effort" to divide the country, while lacking "mature leadership." And former White House chief of staff John Kelly said Friday that he agreed with Mattis' assessment and that he thinks there's an "awful big concern that the partisanship has gotten out of hand, the tribal thing has gotten out of hand."
Asked by Tapper if he agreed specifically with Mattis' comments, Powell doubled down on his criticism of Trump.
"You have to agree with it. I mean, look at what he has done to divide us," he said. "I agree with all of my former colleagues."
"I'm proud of what they're doing. I'm proud that they were willing to take the risk of speaking honesty and speaking truth to those who are not speaking truth," Powell said.
This story has been updated with additional developments Sunday.
CNN's Alison Main contributed to this story.
