'The fostering of semi-ironic adoration – just look at the amount of times the brand is mentioned on social media – combined with clever diversification, including 'healthier' options and the smash-success vegan sausage roll, has allowed it to thrive in a dying landscape.
There is the possibility, according to one expert, that Greggs could see itself listed on the FTSE 100 index in the not to distant future.
John Moore, a senior investment manager at Brewin Dolphin, said: 'The business is now on the cusp of the FTSE 100 which is remarkable given where they have come from and what they do, and that is testament to good, deep management and culture – evidenced by the staff reward announced today – and a balance sheet that can self-finance their ambitions.'
Greggs is dishing out a bonus of £7million to its 22,000 employees after the group enjoyed bumper results and a 'phenomenal year', a trading update revealed today.
Each member of staff will pocket £300 each at the end of this month, the bakery group announced today, as it unveiled a jump in sales and upped its annual profit forecast.
Greggs, which saw the launch of its £1.55 vegan steak bake attract late-night queues around the country last week, said it plans to open 100 new stores over the next year.
The company said its underlying pre-tax profit, even with the payout to staff, would be ahead of expectations when it announces the 2019 results in March.
'I am delighted to announce that we will also be making a special additional payment to all of our colleagues across the business who have worked so hard to deliver this success in what has been a phenomenal year,' the bakery chain's boss Roger Whiteside said.
Greggs said that while there was 'strong demand' for its traditional offerings like sausage rolls and doughnuts, initiatives like its, as the company now dubs it, 'iconic' vegan sausage roll, a meat free steak bake and vegan doughnut, had all helped to bump up sales.
In today's trading update, Greggs revealed its sales jumped 13.5 per cent in the last year, against an increase of 7.2 per cent a year earlier. Like-for-like sales, which strips out the impact of shop openings, rose by 9.2 per cent.
Greggs opened 138 new shops, while closing 41, over the year, bringing its total to 2,050 across the UK. It said it plans to add a further 100 throughout 2020.
While the bakery chain has found itself enjoying stronger sales and a flurry of media attention from its vegan offerings, the retail sector is no picnic, and the group expects to face a fairly rough ride over the next year.
'Looking to the year ahead, we face strong sales comparatives and cost inflation headwinds present a challenge,' boss Mr Whiteside said.
The rising cost of pork was set to continue taking its toll on the firm's bottom line, while a hike in minimum wage costs are also expected to put pressure on the company.
Nigel Frith, an analyst at Ask Traders, said: 'There is no denying that this year has been a remarkable year for Greggs. Five profit upgrades since the beginning of 2019, like for like sales up 9.2% for the year and total sales up a slid 8.7% in the final three months of the year compared to 2018. It is hardly surprising that the share price is up a staggering 80% across the past year.
'Greggs evolving menu has really hit a sweet spot with its customers. The move to include vegan sausage rolls early last year and now the stake bake has done a huge amount for brand awareness. Paying back £7 million in a one-off payment to employees following the exceptional year is only adding to that.'
