Global virus deaths passed 500,000 on Sunday, while confirmed cases reached the 10 million mark. Fresh outbreaks in Florida, Texas, and California forced state governments to reverse some reopening measures to curb further damage. The spike in cases has so far not fueled a similar uptick in coronavirus deaths, but experts have said the virus' spread could revive strict lockdowns.
Boeing led the Dow higher. The plane manufacturer's shares leaped roughly 7.5% in early trading after US regulators approved test flights of its beleaguered 737 Max model.
Gilead stock also soared on Monday after the biotech company priced a five-day course of remdesivir, its experimental COVID-19 treatment, at $2,340. The company also nixed country-by-country price negotiations to further expand remdesivir's market.
Read more: We spoke with 3 financial experts, who said to make 4 these trades right now to get ahead of surprising gains when earnings season starts next month
"As the world continues to reel from the human, social and economic impact of this pandemic, we believe that pricing remdesivir well below value is the right and responsible thing to do," Gilead's CEO and chairman, Daniel O'Day, said in a statement .
Facebook stock plummeted for the second straight session as more companies announced boycotts of the social-media giant. Several firms have recently turned away from advertising on social media to push platforms to take a stronger stance against hate speech.
Oil climbed slightly higher. West Texas Intermediate jumped as much as 2.1%, to $39.30 per barrel. Brent crude , oil's international standard, gained 1.4%, to $41.58, at intraday highs.
The upswing followed a massive fall to cap last week's session. Major indexes plummeted more than 2% on Friday as the governors of Texas and Florida reversed some of the states' reopening measures and warned of new virus hot spots. Bank stocks slumped after the Federal Reserve announced it would limit stock buybacks and dividends to boost emergency reserves.
In an online conference on Friday, European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde said that though the worst of the coronavirus pandemic may be over, the global economy's recovery would be " sequential and restrained ."
Now read more markets coverage from Markets Insider and Business Insider:
