Skills test: demonstrate your football knowledge to earn real money Credit: Getty
Football Index offers traders the chance to use their knowledge of the sport to buy and sell shares in players, with the aim of making a profit
Football Index is a stock market where you trade footballers instead of companies. It’s easy to use and, for anyone interested in football, a lot of fun. Traders use Football Index to bet on the future success of a real-life footballer by purchasing shares in them.
So, if you suspect that Mohamed Salah or Memphis Depay, for example, might be about to hit form, you can buy a share (or many) in them.
If other traders also believe these players will do well then they too might buy, pushing their value up and therefore rewarding your intuition. You can sell at any time, or keep them to build your portfolio.
If Depay, for instance, performs particularly well in a match for Lyon, scores a hat-trick and comes top of Football Index’s Media Rankings the next day as a result, he’ll also generate dividends per share, which are paid into your Football Index account.
If Depay continues this run of form and is linked with a move back to the Premier League, transfer rumours flood the news and fellow traders buy in the hope of sweeping up the dividends. The better he plays and the more likely he is to do well in future, the higher his price rises.
As in the real-world stock market, it’s up to you to decide the level of risk you take. If you had watched, pondered and waited before buying one Memphis Depay share, it would cost you (at the time of writing) £4.42, quite a bit more than those who picked him up back in January and paid around £1.34 per share.
Virgil van Dijk went from £1.54 per share in January to a high of £3.15 at the start of the season – a return of 104 per cent – before going back down to £2.74. Hindsight is wonderful and knowing when to cash out is, of course, part of being a successful trader.
The most expensive player on the Index currently is Neymar at £8.09 per share because he is one of the world’s best and most famous footballers, and also because he plays for PSG in a league he absolutely dominates, guaranteeing dividend returns from media headlines and his matchday performances.
There are more than 3,000 players on the Index, and unearthing an undervalued gem can yield great results. A left-back at a lower league club might cost £0.20 now but if he fulfills the potential you’ve predicted within the next three years, who’s to say he won’t be worth the same as Lucas Digne (£1.76) some day? If you bought 100 shares in the left-back at 95p in January 2019, that would be a return of £176 from £95.
This is where your knowledge of football comes into play. Defensive midfielders like Fernandinho or Sergio Busquets are vitally important to their respective teams, but they are in the later years of their career and are less likely to earn the kind of match day dividends of a more exciting, attacking midfielder. That’s probably why World Cup winner Busquets is available at £0.68 and Manchester City’s Phil Foden is £3.56.
Long-term goal: young up-and-coming players tend to be priced higher Credit: Getty
Foden’s price may seem relatively high to you now, but if you believe he will go on to become one of Europe’s best attacking midfielders, that price may eventually look like a bargain, or perhaps a missed opportunity.
Football Index is gambling (and is regulated as such) but differs from a bet you make with a traditional bookmaker. Many traders find it more to their liking than having a punt on the number of corners, goalscorers or even the result of a match.
You get what you put in, high risk can lead to high reward (and losses) so don’t spend what you can’t afford. But you can only ever lose your stake. If you love football, reckon you have an eye for talent and can spend some time analysing the market, Football Index might be for you.
Football Index is a stock market game where you buy and sell shares in footballers for real money. Profit from your football knowledge by buying low and selling high, winning tax-free dividends along the way. Find out more at Footballindex.co.uk
This article was written by Telegraph Spark Commissioning Editor Jim Bruce-Ball who has no vested interest in Football Index. All content is intended to be used and must be used for informational purposes only.
+18, New UK and Ireland customers only, begambleaware.org , T&Cs apply.
