This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready copies for distribution to your colleagues, clients or customers visit http://www.djreprints.com.
Updated April 23, 2020 8:57 am ET / Original April 23, 2020 6:30 am ET
You knew it was coming. The exchange-traded fund industry immediately jumps on any potentially profitable gimmicky trend to have the first-mover advantage, be it cybersecurity or weed ETFs . The coronavirus is no different except in this case real live human beings are getting infected and dying instead of just our computers and hard drives.
On April 21, ETF distributor Pacer Financial filed a prospectus with the SEC for the Pacer BioThreat ETF, with the delightful ticker symbol VIRS. It will track the BioShares BioThreat Index designed by LifeSci Index Partners to follow “U.S.-listed stocks of companies that help protect against or recover from biological threats to human health based on a proprietary, multi-step research process.” Such companies, the prospectus states, “have products, technologies, and services that: research or combat pandemic diseases such as the novel coronavirus (Covid-19), Zika, H1N1, Ebola, avian flu, and MERS.”
If that isn’t niche-y enough for you, index designer EQM Indexes will begin tracking four Covid-related ones on April 23 : EQM COVID-19 Stock Index, EQM Global Pandemic Disruption Index, Stay at Home Index, and Work from Home Index. EQM Indexes CEO and founder, Jane Edmondson, doesn’t see the launches as capitalizing on the world’s short-term misery but its inevitable future: “We view these themes as investment themes that will perpetuate for a long period of time post the initial crisis, even as we start leaving our homes again. Typically, the market is not very efficient at recognizing inflection points.”
Right now, no U.S. ETF manager has signed on to track these benchmarks, although Edmonson says, “We have been speaking with potential ETF issuers about these ideas since the end of January,” and the firm is “currently in conversations to partner with an issuer to launch some of these concepts in Europe.”
The EQM COVID-19 Stock Index has roughly one-third each of its sector allocation in companies in the vaccine development, diagnostics/testing, and “pharmatherapeutics” industries. Although it will equal-weight its stocks with each re-balance of its portfolio, its current top ten holdings include small coronavirus test developer Co-Diagnostics (CODX), the shares of which have soared about 1,400% in 2020. Then there’s vaccine developer Vaxart (VXRT), which is up only 802% this year, but has still managed to decline 14% on an annualized basis over the past 15 years.
The problem with such speculative healthcare stocks is they often are dependent on the binary outcome of one specific event—FDA approval of their drug/test and then adoption of that drug/test by the broader healthcare industry. Says Edmondson: “We absolutely agree that individual outcomes, especially for drug and biotech stocks, can be binary. Our approach with the Covid-19 companies is to own a basket of all the names materially involved with the vaccine development, treatment, and testing. There are approximately 50 names that we have identified looking at the media announcements, public filings and analyzing drug development and vaccine pipelines.” Hopefully, the winners exceed the losers.
With the other indexes, there are more well-known story stocks such as Zoom Video Communications (ZT), up 111% in 2020, in the EQM Work From Home Index. It has a trailing price-earnings ratio of 1,592, according to Morningstar. And then there’s dotcom darlings Stamp.com (STMP), up 68%; Chewy (CHWY), 50%; Netflix (NFLX), 34%; and Etsy (ETSY), 39%, in the Stay At Home Index. This is an environment where some economists are forecasting a mean recession, or even depression .
What could possibly go wrong?
If it seems improbable that such niche products will ever see the light of day, bear in mind that asset manager Direxion Funds, which has a history launching aggressive niche funds, already filed to launch its Direxion Work From Home ETF (WFH) on April 9, which will track the rival Solactive Remote Work Index.
Like the pandemic itself, the demand for such products is spreading.
You knew it was coming.
