The Special Series notes are produced by IMF experts to help members address the economic effects of COVID-19. The views expressed in these notes are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, its Executive Board, or IMF management.
Government Support to State-Owned Enterprises: Options for Sub-Saharan Africa
The pandemic is causing distress for many African state-owned enterprises. This note discusses guiding principles for intervention, how it can be done, and what governance steps are needed. While the focus is on Africa, the principles are applicable across all regions.
The note proposes recommendations to leverage digital solutions, such as financial management information systems and fiscal transparency portals, to meet the PFM objectives of smooth, efficient, and transparent implementation of COVID-19 responses
Ensuring that ramped-up spending in response to COVID-19 is effective requires addressing vulnerabilities to misuse and corruption. This note identifies measures to mitigate such vulnerabilities, with a particular focus on budget execution controls.
Managing public investment spending plays a key role in the fiscal response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The note discusses two aspects: cuts or postponements in spending in the initial phase, and the scaling up of spending for economic recovery.
Temporary investment incentives can provide investment demand stimulus to support economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. This note describes temporary investment tax incentives and reviews their effectiveness.
The pandemic and the global economic contraction are putting fiscal rules to the test. Many countries are appropriately activating escape clauses to deviate or suspend the fiscal rules. This should be temporary and done transparently.
Faced with decreasing revenues, constrained access to financial markets and large emergency spending needs, governments should adopt a multipronged approach to cash management to ensure there is adequate liquidity to meet their payment obligations.
Spending needs are at an all-time high but many countries lack fiscal space to ramp up spending. Cutting government pay has been put on the table as a temporary measure to help meet urgent needs. This note discusses key issues to consider.
Revenue agencies will have to be ready to restore their operations, safeguard tax collection and recover taxpayers’ compliance to precrisis levels, when COVID-19 spreading is contained and lockdown measures are eased.
COVID-19 is contributing to extreme volatility in crude oil prices. Countries dependent on oil revenues face shortfalls; they should take urgent measures and strengthen revenue administration practices to support the sector while protecting revenues.
Covid-19 is challenging revenue administrations’ operations; they must act quickly to ensure staff and taxpayer safety while implementing governments’ responses, delivering essential services and safeguarding tax collection.
Forecasting tax revenue during the pandemic is challenging. Standard buoyancy approaches likely overestimate revenues. A disaggregated approach using information on the sector- and tax-specific impact of the pandemic improves forecasts.
Digital solutions for direct cash transfers help to identify and validate intended beneficiaries, make payments in a timely and secure manner, and ensure transparency and accountability by providing a reliable audit trail and publishing timely data.
Expenditure policies can help mitigate the economic impact of the pandemic through liquidity support for firms, preserving employment linkages and supporting households. Design is the key to their effectiveness and efficiency.
The COVID-19 crisis won’t have a lasting impact on climate change, but the response will—fiscal policymakers should thus aim to make the recovery green.
Keeping the receipts” (as governments “do what it takes” to support people and firms during the global pandemic and economic downturn) requires strong fiscal transparency, public accountability and institutional legitimacy.
Managing the Impact on Households: Assessing Universal Transfers
Universal transfers can complement existing household income support programs, by reducing temporary or permanent coverage gaps. Their impact will be stronger if a basic delivery system is in place.
Managing the Impacts of the Coronavirus: Guidance on Health Spending Policies
The immediate response to the outbreak should be to increase spending for mitigation and medical treatment. Costs will depend on country-specific factors, e.g. virus exposure, capacity of health systems, and effectiveness of mitigation measures.
Economy-wide tax measures should also apply to extractive industries hit by lower commodity prices. Only in exceptional cases would additional relief be appropriate.
Covid-19 is challenging customs administrations’ operations; they should take urgent measures to sustain international supply chains and implement governments’ health and economic relief policies while continuing addressing compliance.
Reaching Households in Emerging and Developing Economies: Citizen ID, Socioeconomic Data, and Digital Delivery
Income transfers require a basic data and delivery system—citizen ID, financial inclusion, income data—often missing in LIDCs. Implementation can rely on broadening current schemes, relaxing regulations and using alternative data sources.
The urgent priority for oil exporters is to deploy existing financial buffers, reprioritize spending, and mobilize new borrowing to address the COVID-19-shock. The short-term policy response would be enhanced by a commitment to preserve fiscal sustainability in the medium term.
Governments should proactively identify and manage fiscal risks. Policy responses can create new risks and existing contingent liabilities can be more likely to be realized.
Complying with legal framework, reprioritizing spending, ensuring liquidity and timely fund disbursement will help enable emergency spending needs.
Public banks, through loans and guarantees, can help people and firms pay their bills and keep jobs. Public support should be transparently costed and monitored in budgets.
Timely, targeted, and temporary government support for firms is vital for avoiding disruptive bankruptcies and protecting jobs. The support should be transparently costed and monitored.
Revenue agencies must balance temporary relief of tax obligations and government support policies with protecting revenue and safeguarding compliance.
Targeted tax measures can immediately support health priorities, protect individuals and solvent enterprises, and safeguard revenue for the future.
