When it comes to the economic forecast, it's a good idea to proceed with caution, UBS said this week.
While you may be tempted to pare back your stock allocations, experts say that's not warranted.
Unless you're close to retirement or need to rebalance, it's still best to leave those investments untouched.
As the S&P 500 reached new records this week, you might be tempted to ask: How high can the market go?
You might even be thinking of paring back your equity exposure in anticipation that the 10-year bull market might finally be coming to an end. However financial experts warn: not so fast.
That doesn't mean there are not plenty of risks. A message from investment bank UBS to investors right now is caution, the firm said in research published this week.
The cautionary stance comes from a lack of clarity in terms of what catalysts, if any, could drive the markets higher, according to Michael Crook, head of Americas investment strategy at UBS Global Wealth Management.
It's also a recognition that performance has been good so far this year. The S&P 500 hit a record 3,047.87 before closing down 0.1% at 3,036.89 on Tuesday. Year to date, the index is up by more than 21%.
"We're not suggesting investors should be dumping equity investments by any means," Crook said.
Financial advisor Paul Pagnato, CEO and founder of PagnatoKarp in Reston, Virginia, said investors are asking if they should take some risk off the table in light of the recent run up.
"We're advising them to stay the course," Pagnato said.
The good news is that UBS doesn't see negative returns or a recession on the horizon. But the firm is projecting low single-digit returns for stocks over the next six to 12 months, Crook said.
Among the forces that could be a drag on stocks: ongoing trade negotiations between the U.S. and China, slow economic growth and interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve, according to UBS.
"There could be more downside risk, particularly if the trade negotiations start to go sideways," Crook said.
However,  Pagnato said he remains optimistic, based on a checklist of data points he is watching for signs we are going from a bull market to a recession.
Evidence of a downturn — such as rising interest rates, negative company earnings or stocks failing to reach new highs, to name a few examples — is nonexistent, he said.
What's more, the yield curve inversion might not be the bad omen for a recession or downturn that many fear, he said. An inverted yield curve is when short-term U.S. Treasury bond investments pay more than longer-term investments.
"You go back to the late 1800s to see a period of time when you had an inverted yield curve, and the economy flourished and the equity markets flourished," Pagnato said. "I view that as a similar period that we're in now."
