as signals the worst may be over.
These indicators could also turn south, however, if investors perceive that risks to the economy from the coronavirus epidemic will rise significantly more.  “The market can rebound aggressively, if the expectation is that this is a one or two quarter event,” said Marc Pfeffer, chief investment officer at CLS investments. The risk is that the COVID-19 epidemic lingers and requires prolonged or multiple government interventions to prevent an unmanageable public health crisis.
“The market went down quicker and should rebound quicker than the actual economy, but the opening up of the economy is going to take time,” he added. “When you reopen a business after a long closure, it doesn’t mean on day one that the clients come back right away or that you’re prepared to run at full capacity.”
Others argue that the unique catalyst of the current slump in stocks should cause investors to set aside metrics that have predicted previous bottoms. “Another 10% to 20% decline is not out of the question, especially considering the growing number of disparaging forecasts and the crisis in confidence of governments,’ said Brian Belski, chief investment strategist at BMO Capital Markets.
“Given the irrational and fear-laden nature of the current stock market, historical precedents and traditional bottoming signals carry little weight,” he added. “This means we have to stop hearing about coronavirus every minute and we have to stop being irrational with respect to the fear and rhetoric surrounding it,” before calling a market bottom.
The coming week will provide a test for investors with several U.S. data points set to be released that will paint a picture of how the U.S. economy has fared in the early stages of the epidemic. “Bad numbers are better than no numbers at all,” said State Street’s Arone. “Fear of the uncertainty drove  prices way, way down. Even if we get numbers, and they’re terrible, it will be valuable information and if the market can withstand it, that’s bullish.”
Markets will likely overlook more backward looking data, including pending home sales for February, due Monday, Tuesday’s Case-Shiller home price index for January, February construction spending and factory orders, to be released on Wednesday and Thursday, respectively.
More pertinent will be The Conference Board’s consumer confidence index, scheduled for release Tuesday and IHS Markit’s and ISM’s manufacturing purchasing managers indexes for March, due on Wednesday.
Wednesday will also feature payroll firm ADP’s estimate of private job growth in the month of March, while Thursday will bring an estimate of new applications for jobless benefits for the week ended March 28, and Friday will feature the closely watched nonfarm payrolls report, which will give markets the first inkling of the extent of the damage being dealt to labor markets.
On the earnings front ConAgra Foods Inc. CAG,
