The market is finally seeing a shift into cheaper stocks that have long been under pressure, while momentum stocks, the darlings of the past, have lost their charm.
From May 15 through Friday, the $577 million Invesco S&P 500 Pure Value ETF (ticker: RPV)—a fund that selects and weights stocks only based on valuation—had surged nearly 29%, while the broader S&P 500 index gained 12%. Last week alone, the Invesco Pure Value fund rose by 15%, triple the S&P 500’s 5% gain.
Other, more balanced value funds have also been outperforming, though less dramatically. The $5 billion iShares Edge MSCI USA Value Factor ETF (VLUE), which bets on cheap stocks but keeps its sector exposure in line with the broader market, finished the week with a 9% gain. The $17 billion iShares S&P 500 Value ETF (IVE), a capitalization-weighted fund with a tilt toward cheaper names, increased nearly 7%.
“We are now witnessing an extreme confluence of various technical factors that are set to drive a significant upswing in traditional value stocks,” wrote Jefferies strategist Desh Peramunetilleke in a Monday note. “Macro, earnings revisions, valuations and mean-reversion are all supportive of a sharp rebound in value stocks.”
Given value stocks’ current low weighting in the indexes, he noted, the rebound could happen without driving the broader market higher.
It is welcome news for value investors. Value stocks lagged behind the broader market for much of the rally in stocks that spanned the time between the financial crisis and the crash triggered by the pandemic this year.
As the cheaper stocks have gotten cheaper and expensive stocks have become more costly, the valuation gap between the two groups has grown. The differential has reached extreme levels, similar to those seen before the bursting of the tech bubble and the onset of the financial crisis, if not wider.
Even in the first stretch of the market’s recent recovery, from the March low through mid-May, all three funds mentioned above were running below the market. Barron’s wrote then that it might be time for the value trade to work .
Value stocks generally perform better during economic recoveries, but the group is likely to benefit from particularly strong tailwinds this time around. Not only are the shares more beaten-up than normal, but an unprecedented amount of stimulus money is being pumped into the economy by the government.
Companies in the value-stock category are generally more reliant on debt to fund themselves than the market as a whole. The Federal Reserve’s plan to buy corporate bonds, especially debt of investment-grade companies that had been recently cut to junk , has made investors confident that the cheaply traded companies are likely to flourish as borrowing becomes less expensive.
As value gains strength , the “momentum” stocks—the market’s best-performing names over a 6-month or 12-month span—have been losing speed.
Last week, the $9 billion iShares Edge MSCI USA Momentum Factor ETF (MTUM)—with top holdings like Apple (AAPL), Amazon.com (AMZN), and Microsoft (MSFT)—lagged behind the iShares Edge MSCI USA Value Factor ETF by 8.4 percentage points. It was the widest weekly performance gap since both funds were launched in 2013.
“What’s remarkable about this week is the sentiment being expressed in the market right now, where it’s favoring cyclical exposure that is likely to benefit from the reopening of the economy,” said Holly Framsted, BlackRock ’s U.S. head of factor ETFs.
History suggests that trend may continue. Since 1998, each time the index tracked by the Value Factor ETF exceeded the index tracked by the Momentum Factor ETF by more than 5 percentage points over a week, the former has beaten the S&P 500 by an average of more than 8 percentage points over the next 12 months, according to Framsted.
The two groups have consistently exhibited a negative correlation of excess returns, meaning their relative performance to the broader market tends to move in the opposite direction. If the value rally continues, momentum stocks will likely see lagging performance for an extended period.
If value stocks’ comeback lasts more than six months or a year, some of those companies might join the momentum basket, driving that group higher again. That is what happened in 2001, said Framsted, when value stocks rallied after the tech bubble burst.
But by that time, many of today’s value stocks might have rallied too far, making them no longer inexpensive, so their momentum could fade as well. The key to value investing, after all, is to buy the stocks when they are still cheap.
The market is finally seeing a shift into cheaper stocks that have long been under pressure, while momentum stocks, the darlings of the past, have lost their charm.
