Click on ‘buy’ if you want to go long or ‘sell’ if you want to go short, in the deal ticket
Ultimately, ETFs provide individual Australian investors with a number of benefits that would otherwise be difficult to achieve. Specifically, ETFs:
Help indiviudal investors diversify their portfolios and easily gain exposure to international markets, different asset classes and sectors
As with any investment however, investors should remember that investing in ETFs is not without risk. Maybe the most relevant risk to investing or trading in the ETFs that we have discussed today is ‘Market Risk’. As PWC Australia defines it, market risk is the risk of an ‘instrument or investment increasing or decreasing as a result of volatility and unpredicted movement in market valuations.’
Though measures can be taken to mitigate ‘Market Risk’ – for example, taking advantage of the BetaShares Australian Equities Strong Bear Hedge Fund ETF – should you think the ASX 200 is set to decline in value, market risk can never be removed completely.
Ultimately, such a point reiterates the ever-present need for investors and traders to hold a portfolio of diversified assets and always ensure that suitable risk mitigation strategies are being used. As is always the case, investors should never invest more than they are willing or able to lose.
Not ready to start trading ETFs but still eager to get involved in the markets? Click here now to get access to $20,000 in virtual funds and practise trading some of the ASX’s best ETFs with an IG Demo Account today .
This information has been prepared by IG, a trading name of IG Markets Limited. In addition to the disclaimer below, the material on this page does not contain a record of our trading prices, or an offer of, or solicitation for, a transaction in any financial instrument. IG accepts no responsibility for any use that may be made of these comments and for any consequences that result. No representation or warranty is given as to the accuracy or completeness of this information. Consequently any person acting on it does so entirely at their own risk. Any research provided does not have regard to the specific investment objectives, financial situation and needs of any specific person who may receive it. It has not been prepared in accordance with legal requirements designed to promote the independence of investment research and as such is considered to be a marketing communication. Although we are not specifically constrained from dealing ahead of our recommendations we do not seek to take advantage of them before they are provided to our clients.
Go long or short on thousands of international stocks.
