Three numbers to start your day:
Since February, about 4.6 million Americans have stopped actively looking for work, and another 2.2 million are unemployed not on layoff.
About 8.8 million Americans have gained employment since the job market hit bottom in April. The vast majority of that improvement has come from the sharp decline in the number of Americans on temporary layoff, from a peak of over 18 million in April. The majority of those gains occurred in May, with around 10.6 million identifying as on temporary layoff in June.
By contrast, people who didn’t self-identify as being on temporary layoff have had a much shallower recovery, adding just 1.3 million jobs since April. And even if everyone on temporary layoff were immediately rehired, the job losses elsewhere would mean that the unemployment rate would still be over 7%.
Going to the dentist is singularly unappealing amid a viral respiratory pandemic, which is why employment fell by 56% between February and April. That drop was far bigger, in percentage terms, than the decline in restaurant employment over the same period.
More recently, however, dentists have bounced back, although total employment is still more than 10% below February levels. The recovery at dentists’ offices has been far more impressive than in any other sector that suffered sharp losses during the virus crisis.
$64 was roughly the average hourly wage for managers in “professional, technical, and scientific services” in May, down 3.2% from the level in February. The category includes many software engineers, lawyers, accountants, architects, and advertising agencies.
Average wages for Americans across the entire job market have risen during the crisis because the lowest-paid workers absorbed the bulk of the job losses, but wages at the top have also dropped—even when workers kept their jobs. Across all sectors, managerial and supervisory pay fell 1% from February through June, with particularly notable declines in tech, media, and retail, all of which were down 7%.
By contrast, average wages for “production and nonsupervisory” workers were 3% higher in June than in February thanks to the shift in the mix of employment. But in the “leisure and hospitality” sector, which has borne the brunt of employment losses, nonsupervisory hourly pay was still 2% lower.
Numbers by Barron’s is our daily podcast. Find out more here .
6.8 Million American Jobs Aren’t Coming Back, and Two More Numbers to Know
